Responses to Records Requested:

Item 1, 2, 3, 4, &5:

PDF attached

Item 6:

Item 7:

The only agreement we have in place is a form for Counsel to complete before being
allowed to view any footage of client video.

All training for our BWCs has been verbal instruction & issuance of department

SOP.

NOTE: Our BWC program was initiated in a “testing phase”, with 13 units donated to the department
being placed in service on April 1,2015. We are still in the process of reviewing how the units
are received by the general community, their usefulness as effective means to record events
and interactions between deputies and those they come in contact with during performance
of their duties, and length of time records will be kept.

ACLU

AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION
of VIRGINIA

June 12, 2015

Louisa County Sheriff’s Office
Attn: FOIA Officer
P0 Box 504
Louisa, VA 23093

AMERICAN CIVIL
LIBERTIES UNION OF
ViRGINIA
701E. FRANKLIN ST.

RICHMONO. VA fl219
1/804.644.8080
WWW.ACLUVA.ORG

Re: FOJA Request! Body Camera Equipment and Policy

Dear Aitn: FOIA Offlcer:
This letter is a request under the Virginia Freedom of Information Act (FOJA), Va. Code
§ 2.2-3 700 et seq. This request seeks records regarthng law enforcement worn body
cameras, also referred to as police body cameras or body-worn cameras (hereinafter
“body cameras”).

Records Requested

Please provide copies of the following records:

1. All policies, practices, procedures, rules, or orders concerning the use of body

cameras, including:

a. policies or procedures governing use of body cameras;
b. what types of data are obtained;
c.
d.
e.
f.

the conditions under which body cameras are used;
the frequency of body camera use;
the number of body camera units or systems acquired; and
the number of officers equipped with body cameras;

2. All policies, practices, procedures, rules, or orders concerning the review of body
camera data by supervising officers or staff or civilian review personnel to ensure
officer compliance with department or agency policies and applicable state and
federal law;

3. All policies, practices, procedures, rules, or orders concerning the storage of data

obtained using body cameras, including:

a. where the data is stored;
how long data is stored;
b.
c. when data must be discarded; and
d. how much data your agency or department currently stores;

4. All policies, practices, procedures, rules, or orders concerning access to body

camera data, including:

the legal justification required before a law enforcement employee or

a.
b. member of the public may access body camera data;

AMERICAN CIVIL
LIBERTIES UNION OF

7OiE.FRANKLIN ST
SUITE 1412
RICHMOND, VA 23219
T/803 644.0080
w.ACLUVA.ORG

c. purposes for which the data may be accessed;
d. purposes for which the data may not be accessed;
e. who may access the data, what procedures they must go through to obtain

access, and who must authorize access; and
the existence of a system that records who accesses the data and when the
data is accessed;

f.

5. All policies, practices, procedures, rules, or orders concerning the sharing of data

obtained through body cameras, including:

a. what type of data1 is shared;
b. what databases your agency puts collected body camera data into; and
c.

third patties, governmental or private, that may access your agency’s body
camera data, including what procedures a third party must go through to
access the data and any restrictions placed on a third party regarding
further sharing of your body camera data;

6. All agreements to share body camera data with outside agencies or departments,

corporations, or other entities; and

7. All training materials used to instruct members of your department or agency in
body camera deployment, data management, or operation of automated records
systems that contain body camera data to which any member of your department
or agency has access, including regional or shared databases.

Please inform me in advance if the cost of complying with this request will be greater
than $50.

If the requested documents are available in electronic form, please e-mail them to me at
flcnaackacluva.org. Otherwise, please mail them to me at ACLU of Virginia, 701 F
Franklin Street, Suite 1412, Richmond, Virginia 23219. Please respond within five (5)
business days as required by FOIA. Thank you for your prompt attention to this matter. If
you have questions, please contact me at flcnaackacluva.org or (804) 523-2144.

Sincerely,

rJ

Frank Knaack
Director, Public Policy and Communications

1 “Data” or “body camera data’ means any daM recorded by a body camera.

LOUISA COUNTY SHERIFF’S OFFICE

GENERAL ORDERS

SUBJECT:

Body Worn Cameras

NUMBER:

2-51

EFFECTIVE DATE: April 1, 2015
AMMENDS/SUPERSEDES:

REVIEW DATE: April 1, 2016
APP RO%:

Note: This general order is for inlernal use only, and does not enlarge an officers civil or criminal liability in anyway.
It should not be construed as the creation of a higher standard of safety or care in an evidentiary sense, with respect to
if proven, can only form the basis of a complaint by this Office, and
third party claims. Violations of this directive,
then only in a non-judicial administrative setting.

INDEX WORDS

Body-worn Camera (BWC)

I. PURPOSE
This policy is intended to provide officers with instructions on when and how to use body-worn cameras
(BWCs) so that officers may reliably record their contacts with the public in accordance with the law.

II. POLICY
It is the policy of this department that officers shall activate the BWC when such use is appropriate to the
proper performance of his or her official duties, where the recordings are consistent with this policy and
law. This policy does not govern the use of surreptitious recording devices used in undercover operations.
hI. PROCEDURES

A.

Administration
The Louisa County Sheriff’s Office has adopted the use of the BWC to accomplish several objectives.
The primary objectives are as follows:
incidents.
1. BWCs allow for accurate documentation of police-public contacts, arrests, and critical
They also serve to enhance the accuracy of officer reports and testimony in court,
2. Audio and video recordings also enhance this agency’s ability to review probable cause for arrest,
office and suspect interaction, and evidence for investigative and prosecutorial purposes and to
provide additional information for officer evaluation and training.
3. The BWC may also be useful in documenting crime and accident scenes or other events that include
the confiscation and documentation of evidence or contraband

2-5 1.1

B. When and How to Use the BWC

1. Deputies shall activate the BWC to record all contacts with citizens while in the performance of official
duties.
2. BWCs shall remain operating except in situations where individuals have a reasonable expectation of
privacy, such as a restroom, etc. They shall remain activated when an officer is involved in an arrest
of search of a residence or individual.
3. Prior to deactivation of a recorded event, the officer shall utilize the BWC to record the time, date, and
location, and reason the unit is being turned off. At the conclusion of this period, the deputy shall also
record the time and date the BWC is re-activated, The BWC shall remain activated until the event is
completed in order to ensure the integrity of the recording unless the contact moves into an area
restricted by this policy (see items 0.1-4)
If a deputy fails to activate the BWC, fails to record the entire contact, or interrupts the recording, the
officer shall document why a recording was not made, was interrupted, or was terminated.

4.
5. Civilians shall not be allowed to review the recordings at the scene.

C.

Procedures for BWC Use
1. BWC equipment is issued primarily to uniformed personnel as authorized by the Sheriff or Chief
Deputy. Officers who are assigned BWC equipment must use the equipment unless otherwise
authorized by supervisory personnel.
2. Deputies shall use only BWCs issued by the Louisa County Sheriff’s Office. The BWC equipment and
all data, images, video, and metadata captured, recorded, or otherwise produced by the equipment is
the sole property of the Louisa County Sheriff’s Office.
3. Deputies who are assigned BWCs must complete a department approved and/or provided training
training may be
program to ensure proper use and operation of all BWC equipment. Additional
required at periodic intervals to ensure the continued effective use and operation of the equipment,
proper calibration and performance, and to incorporate changes, updates, or other revisions in policy
and equipment.
4. BWC equipment is the responsibility of individual officers and will be used with reasonable care to
ensure proper functioning. Equipment malfunctions shall be brought to the attention of the deputy’s
supervisor as soon as possible so that a replacement unit may be procured.
in order to verify proper functioning and
5. Officers shall inspect and test the BWC prior to each shift
shall notify their supervisor of any problems.
6. Officers shall not edit, alter, erase, duplicate, copy, share, or otherwise distribute in any manner BWC
recordings without prior written authorization and approval of the Sheriff or Chief Deputy.
7. Deputies are encouraged to inform their supervisor of any recordings that may be of value for training
purposes.
If a deputy is suspected of wrongdoing or involved in an officer-involved shooting or other serious use
8.
of force, the department reserves the right to limit or restrict an officer from viewing the video file.
9. Deputies shall not delete any recorded data from BWC units. Requests for deletion of portions of the
in the event of a personal recording) must be submitted in writing and approved by
recordings (e.g..,
All requests and final
the Sheriff or Chief Deputy in accordance with state record retention laws.
decisions shall be kept on file.
10. Officers shall note in incident, arrest, and related reports when recordings were made during the
incident in question. However, BWC recordings shall not be utilized as a replacement for written
reports.

0.

Restrictions of Using the BWC
BWCs shall be used only in conjunction with official
generally be used to record:

law enforcement duties. The BWC shall not
1. Communications with other police personnel without the permission of the Sheriff or Chief Deputy;

2-51.2

E.

F.

2. Encounters with undercover officers or confidential informants;
3. When on break or otherwise engaged in personal activities; or
4.

In any location where individuals have a reasonable expectation of privacy, such as a restroom or
locker room.

Storage

1. All files shall be securely downloaded periodically and no later than the end of each shift. Each file

shall contain information related to the date, BWC identifier, and assigned officer.

2. All images and sounds recorded by the BWC are the exclusive property of the Louisa County Sheriff’s
Office, Accessing1 copying, or releasing files for non-law enforcement purposes is strictly prohibited.
3. All access to BWC files must be specifically authorized by the Sheriff or Chief Deputy, and all access
is to be audited to ensure that only authorized users are accessing the data for legitimate and
authorized purposes.

4. Files should be securely stored in accordance with state records retention laws and no longer than
In capital punishment
useful for purposes of training or for use in an investigation or prosecution.
prosecutions, recordings shall be kept until the offender is no longer under control of a criminal justice
agency.

Supervisory Responsibilities

1. Designated supervisory personnel shall ensure that deputies equipped with BWC devices utilize them

in accordance with policy and procedures defined herein.

2. At least on a monthly basis, supervisors will randomly review BWC recordings to ensure that the
is operating properly and that deputies are using the devices appropriately and in
equipment
accordance with department policy and to identify any areas in which additional training or guidance
is required.

2-51.3

LOUISA Counv Si ERIFT’S OI:I.lcE

AHIMJO D. [tiRILI

$IILrJI

I’. 0. b 504 • Iitr,,,, V)lLr ?I& 23071

REQUEST BY COUNSEL TO VIEW BODY CAMERA FOOTAGE

I am currently representin”0

Charges associated with offense(s) on

on

The Louisa County Sheriffs Office allowed me to view the body camera footage as
outlined bclow:

Date:

Officer:

Counsel Name (printed)

Counsel (Signature)

Officer

date

Bock camera footage accessed by

Case/Inc ident#

Copy Case File

Commonwealth Attorney

j ii)

2)

(1) jill) htfl)I l,13/fl(4 [(it) JAGh

