SHERIFF STEVEN S. SMITH

GREENE COUNTISHERIFF

“PUYRNC CrrIZEws FIRST”

June 23, 2015

Frank Knaack
ACLU of Virginia
701 F Franklin Si, Suite 1412
Richmond, Va. 23219

In Re: FO[A Request

Dear Mr. Knaack:

Enclosed you will find a copy of the requested information pertaining to your request dated

6/16/2015.

Sincerely,

Michelle Wyant
Records Specialist

Enclosures: (Policy: Purpose: Procedures: Mobile Vehicle Video Recorder (MVR)/Wcarable Video
Recorder (V’/VR)

10005 SPOTSWOCD TRAIL * STANARDSVILLE, VIRGINIA 22973 * (434) 985-8682

Greene County Sheriffs Office

GENERAL ORDERS

SUBJECT: SUBJECT: MOBILE
VEHICLE VIDEO RECORDER
(MVR)/WEARABLE VIDEO
RECORDER (WVR)

NUMBER: 8-13

EFFECTIVE DATE: 4/6/15

REVIEW DATE:

AMENDS/SUPERSEDES:

VLEPSC STANDARD: OPR.O.11

APPROVED: Signature of file
Sheriff

NOTE:

I. POLICY:

liability in any way.

This rule or regulation is for internal use only. and does not enlarge a deputies civil
or criminal
It should not be construed as the creation of a
higher standard of safety or care in an evidentiary sense, with respect to third party
claims. Violations of this directive, if proven. can only form the basis of a complaint
by this department. and then only in a non-judicial administrative selling.

Mobile video/audio recording (MVR) mid Wearable Video Recording (WVR) equipment
has been demonstrated to be of value in the prosecution of traffic violations and related
offenses, in evaluation of deputies performance and as well as for training. It has also proven
invaluable in refuting claims of deputy misconduct. In order to maximize the usefulness of
the equipment in these and related areas, deputies shall follow the procedures for MVR and
WVR equipment set forth in this policy. ll recording media,
images. and audio are
property of the Greene County Sherifrs Office and will not be copied. released, or
disseminated in any form or manner outside the parameters of this policy without the
expressed written consent of the Sheriff. Under no circumstances will any member of the
Greene County Sherilis Office make a personal copy of any recorded event without
prior written permission of the Sheriff

II.

PURPOSE:

The purpose of this policy is to provide deputies with guidelines for the use of mobile and
wearable video and audio recording equipment.

Page 1 of5

III.

PROCEDURES:

A.

Equipment Operation Mobile Video Recorder (MVR):

The deputies who are assigned digital mobile video recorder equipped
vehicles will be responsible for the proper use and care of the equipment.
The current system being used is the Digital Ally DVM-500 or 800 digital
recorders. Video is recorded by way of a 32GB Secure Digital (SD) card.
secured in the recorder by way of a security bolt.
It will be operated and
maintained according to manufacturer’s instructions and recommendations.
The wireless body mics will be kept on the chargers to ensure that they are
being charged properly. Deputies must ensure that they are using the correct
mic for their assigned vehicle.

No alterations will be made to the video equipment settings with the
exception to set the proper date, time and/or the night mode. Deputies are
responsible for notifying their Sergeant
if there is an issue with the mic
holster or wired microphone.

Deputies will determine ii’ the video recorder is working properly at
the
beginning of their shift. Any malthnctions will be reported to a supervisor as
soon as possible.

The recorder is activated by:

a. Manually pressing the record button
b. Activating the siren

recorder will stay activated until

The Deputy will be recording audio and video contacts involving traffic
infractions or criminal activity, it will not be turned off until the contact has
ended and the citizen or deputy has left the scene. If an arrest occurs, the
internal
the deputy arrives at his/her
destination and has removed the suspect from the vehicle. Deputies may stop
recording during non-enforcement activities or when there is no citizen
contact, but should realize that the MVR is a powerful tool to refute claims
of police misconduct. Deputies shall not attempt to bypass the video/audio
recorder by using alternative means of lighting (i.e.. using vehicle hazard
flashers when the vehicle emergency lights would be required for safety). or
purposely leaving the body mie turned off so it does not record the officer’s
voice even if the video recorder is activated.

Deputies will ensure that
the video/audio recorder is properly recording
traffic stops and enibrcement actions. Note- the video system has a self time
out feature that will turn the unit off if the vehicle has been sitting without
running for a period of time. The lighted red LED indicates that the unit is
powered on and recording when activated. Deputies will ensure that the unit
is on and ready to be used when they get back into their assigned vehicle if it
has been parked and not running for a period of time.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

Deputies are prohibited &om tampering with the recording device.

Page 2 of 5

8.

Deputies will not attempt to delete or alter the video recordings. Attempting
to do so may be construed as attempting to falsify or destroy work related
materials, which could lead to dismissal or criminal prosecution, depending
on the circumstances.

B.

Retrieval and Stora1e of Recordable Media

I. The mobile video recorder system and recorded media is the properly of the
Greene County Sheriffs Office and are not to be copied without the permission
of the Sheriff

2. Recorded incidents that are not of evidentiaiy value will be kept for a period of
least 90 days before being purged. The deputy shall be responsible for
at
checking the SD/CF card memory status of each unit, and downloading the
SD/CF cards to the proper storage device at a minimum of every two weeks.

3. Deputies will notif’ the shift supervisor as soon as practical of a recorded
incident that has eviderniar value. The shift supervisor will determine if the
recorded incident should be removed immediately to preserve evidence, and will
access the SD/CF card to make a copy of the incident.

4. Recorded incidents that are determined to be of evidentiary value will be treated

as evidence. Refer to 3-05 Property and Evidence for evidence procedures.

5. Deputies are encouraged to inform a supervisor of any recorded incidents that

may be of value for training purposes.

6.

If an incident report is completed for a recorded event, officers will document
that fact in the narrative of the IBR.

C.

Use of Media in Court

I. When a recorded incident is required for prosecution, a duplicate in DVD format

will be provided.

2. The requesting officer will place the duplicate copy in Property & Evidence. It

will remain there until the legal process is complete.

Deputies will notify the courts and Commonwealth’s Attorney before trial date
that a video will he presented as evidence to ensure that a video player and
monitor are available.

D.

Eguipment Operation- Wearable Video Recorder (WVrn:

Page 3 of5

L Department issued WVR’s are intended for official Departmenta’ use only

and are not to be used for frivolous or personal activities. Intentional
misuse or abuse of the units will result in disciplinary action.

2. Uniformed deputies will use only those WVRs issued and approved by

the Department. The wearing of personal video recorders is not
authorized. The Greene County Sheriffs Office currently uses the Digital
Ally First Vul-ID to view or upload videos by way of the issued USB
cable.

3. WVRs will be assigned to individual deputies.

a. Uniformed officers shall wear the WVR while on duty.

b. WVRs will not be rotated at shift change and will remain the
responsibility of each assigned officer.

4. Deputy Responsibility

a.
Prior to beginning a shift. deputies assigned a WVR will ensure its
readiness by conducting an operational inspection. When not in use during
working hours, the unit shall be turned off and kept plugged into charge.
Willful failure to properly maintain battery life by not keeping the unit
plugged in when not in use may result in disciplinary action.

Any problems preventing the use of the unit during the shift will be

b.
reported to the immcdiatc supervisor.

Problems that cannot be remedied will be reported to the

c.
lieutenant.

Deputies shall activate their body cameras on all calls for service

d.
and self-initiated enibrcement activities.

e.
The Deputies will download video to the appropriate server upon
indication that the device is nearing capacity. or if needed for an incident
that has evidentiary value, as ‘veil as an incident that the officer believes
may generate a complaint. The officer should flag or bookmark any video
related to a criminal or traffic case belonging to another officer or that
may be useful to the Department for training purposes.

5.

Supervisor Responsibility

a.
according to policy guidelines.

It is incumbent on supervisors to ensure officers utilize WVR’s

Page 4 of5

Supervisors will conduct random reviews of recordings in order to

b.
assess officer performance as ‘veil as flag videos that may be appropriate
for training purposes.

If a complaint is associated with a recorded event, or if a deputy

c.
believes an incident may generate a complaint, the supervisor will flag the
video for indefinite retention.

d. Video Evidence

See Section C and refer to 3-05 Property and Evidence for evidence
procedures.

e. Video Purge

Recorded incidents will be kept for a period of at least 90 days before being
purged

This policy does not apply to Tacticai or Swat operations.

PageS ofs

