ISLE OF WIGHT COUNTY SHERIFF’S OFFICE 

GENERAL ORDERS 

SUBJECT: BODY WORN CAMERA (BWC) 

NUMBER: 2-52A 

 

EFFECTIVE DATE: JANUARY 21, 2015 
 
AMENDS/SUPERSEDES: 2-52A Dated: 
AUGUST 19, 2014 
 

 

VLEPSC STANDARDS: OPR.01.11 
 

 
 

REVIEW DATE:  

APPROVED: 
______________________________ 
SHERIFF 

 

 
NOTE:   
 

 

This rule or regulation is for internal use only, and does not enlarge a deputy's civil 
or  criminal  liability  in  any  way.    It  should  not  be  construed  as  the  creation  of  a 
higher standard of safety or care in an evidentiary sense, with respect to third party 
claims.    Violations  of  this  directive,  if  proven,  can  only  form  the  basis  of  a 
complaint by this agency, and then only in a non-judicial administrative setting. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
I. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II. 
 
 
 
 
 
III. 
 

 

 

INDEX WORDS: 

 
 
 

Equipment 
BWC 
Body worn camera 

POLICY: 
 
It is the policy of the Isle of Wight County Sheriff’s Office that deputies shall activate the 
body worn camera (BWC) when such use is appropriate to the proper performance of his 
or her official duties, where the recordings are consistent with this policy and law.  This 
policy does not govern the use of surreptitious recording devices used in undercover 
operations. 

PURPOSE: 

This policy is intended to provide deputies with instructions on when and how to use 
BWCs so that officers may reliably record their contacts with the public in accordance 
with the law. 

PROCEDURES: 

A. 

Administration: 

 
 
 
 
 
 

This agency has adopted the use of the BWC to accomplish several objectives.  
The primary objectives are as follows: 

1. 
 
 

BWCs allow for accurate documentation of law enforcement-citizen  
contacts, arrests, and critical incidents.  They also serve to enhance the  
accuracy of deputy reports and testimony in court. 

2-52A.1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2. 
 
 
 

3. 
 
 

Audio and video recordings also enhance this agency’s ability to review  
probable cause for arrest, deputy and suspect interaction, and evidence for  
investigative and prosecutorial purposes and to provide additional    
information for deputy evaluation and training. 

The BWC may also be useful in documenting crime and crash scenes or  
other events that include the confiscation and documentation of evidence  
or contraband. 

B.  When and how to use the BWC: 
 

1. 

2. 
 
 

3. 

Deputies shall activate the BWC to record all law enforcement contacts 
with citizens in the performance of official duties. 

If a deputy fails to activate the BWC, fails to record the entire contact, or  
interrupts the recording, the deputy shall document why a recording was  
not made, was interrupted, or was terminated. 

Civilians shall not be allowed to review the recordings at the scene. 

Procedures for BWC use: 

1. 
 
 

2. 
 
 
 

3. 
 
 
 
 
 

4. 
 
 
 

BWC equipment is issued primarily to uniformed personnel as authorized  
by this agency.  Deputies who are assigned BWC equipment must use the  
equipment unless otherwise authorized by a supervisor. 

Deputies shall use only BWCs issued by the Isle of Wight County    
Sheriff’s Office.  The BWC equipment and all data, images, video, and  
metadata captured, recorded, or otherwise produced by the equipment is  
the sole property of the Isle of Wight County Sheriff’s Office. 

Deputies who are assigned BWCs must complete an agency approved  
and/or provided training program to ensure proper use and operations.   
Additional training may be required at periodic intervals to ensure the  
continued effective use and operation of the equipment, proper calibration  
and performance, and to incorporate changes, updates, or other revisions in 
policy and equipment. 

BWC equipment is the responsibility of individual deputies and will be  
used with reasonable care to ensure proper functioning.  Equipment  
malfunctions shall be brought to the attention of the duty supervisor as  
soon as possible so a replacement unit may be issued. 

C. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

2-52A.2 

5. 
 
 

6. 
 
 

7. 
 

8. 
 
 

9. 
 
 
 

Deputies shall inspect and test the BWC prior to each shift in order to  
verify proper functioning and shall notify the duty supervisor of any  
problems. 

Deputies shall not edit, alter, erase, duplicate, copy, share, or otherwise  
distribute in any manner BWC recordings without prior permission from  
the Sheriff or his designee. 

Deputies are encouraged to inform their supervisors of any recordings that  
may be of value for training purposes. 

If a deputy is suspected of wrongdoing or involved in an officer involved  
shooting or other serious use of force, the agency reserves the right to limit 
or restrict a deputy from viewing the video file. 

Requests for deletion of portions of the recordings (e.g., in the event of a  
personal recording) must be submitted in writing and approved by the  
Sheriff or his designee in accordance with Virginia record retention laws.   
All requests and final decisions shall be kept on file. 

10. 
 
 

Deputies shall note in incident, arrests, and related reports when  
recordings were made during the incident in question.  However, BWC  
recordings are not a replacement for written reports. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Restrictions on using the BWC: 

D. 
 

The BWC shall not generally be used to record: 

Communications with other law enforcement personnel without the  
permission of the Sheriff. 

  BWCs shall be used only in conjunction with official law enforcement duties.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

In any location where individuals have a reasonable expectation of   
privacy, such as a locker room or restroom. 

Encounters with undercover officers or confidential informants. 

When on break or otherwise engaged in personal activities. 

1. 
 

2. 

3. 

4. 
 

 

5. 

As a general matter, the body camera shall be rendered inactive while a 
SRO is on school grounds or at a school-related activity or event, unless 
there is a legitimate, law enforcement need for a SRO to activate the body 
camera. 

 
 

 

 

2-52A.3 

E. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

F. 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

Storage: 

1. 
 
 
 

2. 
 
 

3. 

4. 
 
 
 
 

5. 
 
 
 
6. 
 

All files shall be securely downloaded periodically at least once every two  
weeks (14 days) or when the BWC hard drive is full, whichever is first.  
Each file shall contain information related to the date, BWC identifier, and 
assigned deputy. 

All images and sounds recorded by the BWC are the exclusive property of  
this agency.  Accessing, copying, or releasing files for non-law  
enforcement purposes is strictly prohibited. 

 

All access to BWC files shall only be done by a supervisor. 

Files will be securely stored and in accordance with Virginia record  
retention laws and no longer than for a useful purposes of training or for  
use in an investigation or prosecution.  In capital punishment prosecutions, 
recordings shall be kept until the offender is no longer under the control of 
a criminal justice agency. 

Deputies will notify the shift supervisor as soon as practical of a taped 
incident that has evidentiary value.  The shift supervisor will determine if the 
recorded incident should be removed immediately to preserve evidence. 

Recorded incidents that are determined to be of evidentiary value will be treated as 
evidence.  Refer to 2-18 Property and Evidence Control for evidence procedures. 

Supervisory Responsibility: 

1. 
 
 

2. 
 
 
 
 

Supervisory personnel shall ensure that deputies equipped with BWC  
devices utilize them in accordance with policy and procedures defined  
herein. 

At least on a monthly basis, supervisors will randomly review BWC  
recordings to ensure that the equipment is operating properly and that  
deputies are using the devices appropriately and in accordance with policy  
and to identify any areas in which additional training or guidance is  
required. 

2-52A.4 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

