DEPARTMENT OF POLICE

( I,i,iSiandaraj

4RCflC

COLONEL PHILIrA. BROADEOOT
CHIEF OF POLICE

LT COLONEL RONALD 0. HAIRSTON
DEPUTY C[IIEE

DANVELLE, VIRGINIA 24543

(434) 799-6515 FAX: (434) 797-8801

MAOR EDWARD V BURK!
OPERATIONS DIVISION

MAIOR CHRIST0rHER K WILES
SERVICES DIVISION

June 19, 2015

Frank Knaack
Director, Public Policy and Communications
American Civil Liberties Union of Virginia
701 E. Franklin St., Suite 1412
Richmond, VA 23219

Dear Mr. Knaack:

Your letter of June 12, 2015 requesting records on body worn cameras was received on
June 16, 2015.
I have copied the body of your letter and provided beside each request
the answer to the question or the location of the information.

Records Requested

Please provide copies of the following records:

1. All policies, practices, procedures, rules, or orders concerning the use of body

cameras, including:

a. policies or procedures governing use of body cameras; (information

contained in attached policy)

d.

e.

f.

b. what types of data are obtained; (information contained in attached policy)
c.

the conditions under which body cameras are used; (information
contained in attached policy)
the frequency of body camera use; (information contained in attached
policy)
the number of body camera units or systems acquired; and (in lieu of
producing the purchase requisition records, we bought 116 cameras)
the number of officers equipped with body cameras; (this is not a recoreL
but we issued 111 cameras to officers, and kept 5 as replacement spares)
g. All policies, practices, procedures, rules, or orders concerning the review

of body camera data by supervising officers or staff or civilian review
personnel to ensure officer compliance with department or agency policies
and applicable state and federal law; (information contained in attached
policy)

I irgiliiU !,,s Eiifin eitzr,i, Pr fixsiu,;at Sru,rda&s Cr,,,:s,:Lc.vh,p,

ACCREDITED BY

Page 2

2. All policies, practices, procedures, rules, or orders concerning the storage of data

obtained using body cameras, including:

a. where the data is stored; (information contained in attached policy)
b. how long data is stored; (information contained in attached policy)
c. when data must be discarded; and (information contained in attached

policy)

d. how much data your agency or department currently stores; (since data is
constantly added and deleted, the amount fluctuates. The current amount
of data stored in the system is around 4 Gigabytes)

3. All policies, practices, procedures, rules, or orders concerning access to body

camera data, including:

a.

the legal justification required before a law enforcement employee or
(information contained in attachea policy)

b. member of the public may access body camera data; (information

contained in attached policy)

c. purposes for which the data may be accessed; (information contained in

attached policy)

in attached policy)

d. purposes for which the data may not be accessed; (information contained

e. who may access the data, what procedures they must go through to

obtain access, and who must authQrize access; and (information
contained in attached policy)
the existence of a system that records who accesses the data and when
the data is accessed; (information contained in attached policy)

f.

4. All policies, practices, procedures, rules, or orders concerning the sharing of data

obtained through body cameras, including:

c.

a. what type of data is shared; (information contained in attached policy)
b. what databases your agency puts collected body camera data into; and

(information contained in attached policy)
third parties, governmental or private, that may access your agency’s body
camera data, including what procedures a third party must go through to
access the data and any restrictions placed on a third party regarding
further sharing of your body camera data; (information contained in
attached policy)

5. All agreements to share body camera data with outside agencies or departments,

corporations, or other entities; and (information contained in attached MOU)

6. All training materials used to instruct members of your department or agency in
body camera deployment, data management, or operation of automated records
systems that contain body camera data to which any member of your department
or agency has access, including regional or shared databases. (training
consisted of a practical demonstration with hands-on instruction and covered the
attached policy; no additional printed material was used)

Page 3

Sincerely,

Colonel Philip A. Broadfoot
Chief of Police

Attachments:

General Order OPR 169
Memorandum of Understanding

copy

MEMORAN DUM OF UNDERSTANDING

This Memorandum of Understanding, entered into between the Danville Police
Department and the Danville Commonwealth’s Attorney’s Office, establishes the
circumstances and conditions under which computerized record and report information
collected and maintained by the Danville Police Department may be accessed by the
Commonwealth’s Attorney’s Office.

Direct access to the police department’s record and report information by the
Commonwealth’s Attornefs Office is critical to the efficient operation of the criminal
justice system. To accomplish this, the Danville Police Department will grant the
Danville Commonwealth’s Attorney’s Office direct desktop inquiry access to the
computerized criminal histories and incident report databases maintained by the police
department.

Because of the complexity and sensitive natu1e of the information contained in the
databases and the need to maintain its confidentiality, the Danville Commonwealth’s
Attorney’s Office agrees to the following:

• Access will be limited to personnel who have received appropriate training in

the use of the databases and who have been granted direct inquiry access
rights by both the Department of Information Technology and the Police
Department.

• Any information accessed will only be used to support the investigation or

prosecution of criminal cases.

• No information accessed from the databases will be disseminated outside the

Danville Commonwealth’s Attorney’s Office except information the
Commonwealth Attorney is required to disseminate to the defendant by
the Rules of Court and the ease law.
No other information accessed from the databases will he disseminated
outside the Danville Con,moiiwealth’s Attorney’s Office without
authorization of the chief of police.
Periodic audits will be conducted to ensure compliance with these restrictions.

•

•

This Memorandum of Understanding is unending, but may be modified upon mutual
agreement of both parties or terminated unilaterally by either puny.

Date:_________________

Signed://4t -

n /

t/ >*

Colonel Philip A. Broadfoot
Chief of Police

Date:_______________

/

/

Signed:

Michael Jam Newman
Commonwealth’s Attorney

CITY OF DANVILLE

POLICE DEPARTMENT

POLICY AND PROCEDURES

V.LE.P.S.C. STANDARD: OPR.0l.l 1

SUBJECT: Mobile video/audio
recording. body worn camera
GENERAL ORDER: OPR.169

EFFECTIVE DATE: July 1,2014

REVIEW DATE: July, 2015

APPROVED BY:

(CHIEF OF POLICE)

I.

11.

Ill.

PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this policy to provide officers with guidelines for the use of
body worn mobile video and audio recording equipment. commonly referred to as
a body worn camera.

POLICY:
A body worn camera can provide powerful evidence of criniinal activity and has
been demonstrated to be of value in documenting officers’ interactions with
individuals for use in the evaluation of officer integrity, professionalism and
performance. It also serves as a useful training tool to improve law enforcement
techniques and tactics.
In order to maximize the utility of this equipment in these
and related areas, officers shall follow the procedures for body worn camera use
as set forth in this policy.
DEFINITIONS:
A. Body Worn Camera (BWC) A system worn by individual officers that

records audio/video data and related metadata.

B. Evidence Transfer Module (ETM) A docking station for BWCs that

functions to upload audio/video data from the cameras and to recharge them
for use.

C. Evidence.com A web-bused evidence management system that securely stores

audio/video/photo data.

D. Evidence Sync A computer-based program that frmnctions to upload

audio/video data to from BWCs to Evidence.com.

E. Mobile App A mobile application specifically designed by the BWC

manufacturer that is used to connect to a BWC or Evidence.com for the
purpose of reviewing. ta2ging. and/or classifying audio/video recordings.

IV.

PROCEDURES:

A. Program Objectives:

Tins agency has adopted the use of BWCs in order to accomplish several
objectives including:
I. Accurate documentation of events, actions, conditions and statements

made during arrests and critical incidents, so as to enhance officer reports,
collection of evidence and testimony in court.

2. The enhancement of this agency’s ability to review circumstances

involving arrest, arrest procedures, officer and citizen contacts, evidence
for investigative purposes. as well as for officer evaluation and training.

3. To resolve complaints of misconduct and excessive force against officers.

B. Body Worn Camera Procedures

Officers shall adhere to the following procedures when using BWCs:
I. A BWC will be assigned to individual officers and will not be used by

others. It is the responsibility of each officer to ensure his assigned BWC
is in good working condition and fully charged before the stan of his shift.
2. Unifonned officers assigned BWCs will be issued their device prior to the

start of their shift and wear it on their person until the end of their shift.
Uniformed officers will return their BWCs to the department at the end of
their shift unless otherwise approved by a supervisor.

3. Plain clothed officers will carry their BWCs on or about their person while

conducting law enforcement activities that could reasonably result in
contacts outlined in C.2.

4. Following an officer’s shift, the BWC will be returned to the ETM or
connected to a computer with Evidence Sync for data uploading and
recharging.

5. Police personnel will only use BWCs issued or approved by the

In any event in which an audio/video/photo recording is

department.
captured on a non-department issued or approved device by police
personnel engaged in the performance of their official duties, any
recording and its related metadata is the sole property of the Danville
Police DeparLment and is governed by this and other policies.

6. The BWC equipment and all data, images, video and metadata captured,
recorded, or otherwise produced by the equipment is the sole property of
the Danville Police Department and is governed by this and other policies.

7. The BWC will be worn in such a way as to provide an unobstructed

camera view of officer/citizen contacts. Officers will only use department
approved equipment to attach the BWC to their unifornt external ballistic
vest carrier or plain clothing.

8. Officers will document that an audio/video recording was made of a

contact in all reports related to that contact, including but not limited to,
incident, field contact, arrest. call for service notes. and/or and use of force
reports. The acronym BWC will be included in any narrative for the
purpose of informing the Office of the Commonwealth’s Attorney of the
potential existence of video evidence and as a metric for system
evaluation.

9. Officers who are assigned BWCs must complete an agency approved

training program to ensure proper use and operations. Additional training
may be required at periodic intervals to ensure the continued effective use
and operation of the equipment. proper calibration and performance, and

3

to incorporate changes. updates. or other revisions in policy and
equipment.

10. Officers are encouraged to inform their supervisor of any recordings that

may be of value for training purposes.

C. Operating Procedures:

I. Officers vill keep their BWC in the “On” position, ready to record at all
times. Keeping the BWC in the “On” position ensures that the pre-event
buffer captures the 30 seconds of video recorded prior to the initiation of
recording.

2. Officers will activate the BWC to record all contacts with individuals in
the performance of enforcement actions, potentially adversarial contacts,
or at any time that the officer reasonably believes the recording would be
beneficial to the administration of justice. Examples of potentially
adversarial contacts may include, but are not limited to. consensual
encounters on the street, telephone conversations with agitated individuals,
or emotionally charged incidents or situations.

3. The BWC shall remain activated until the event is completed in order to
ensure the integrity of the recording unless the contact moves into an area
restricted by this policy (see D.I-3).
Ifan officer fails to activate the BWC. fails to record the entire contact, or
interrupts the recording. the officer shall document why a recording was
not made, was interrupted, or was terminated.

4.

D. Restrictions on Using BWCs

BWCs may be used only in conjunction with official law enforcement duties.
The BWC may not generally be used as follows:

1. To covertly record members of the department without their knowledge,

unless authorized by the Chief of Police;

2. When on break or otherwise engaged in personal activities; or
3.

In any location where individuals have a reasonable expectation of
privacy, such as a restroom or locker room.

4

4.

In violation of federal or state wiretapping laws regarding the capturing of
phone or private conversations unless one party involved in the
conversation has consented orjudicial approval has been acquired.

E. Data Collection, Access, Use, and Retention

1. Categories have been established within Evidence.corn for the purpose of
classifying the audio/video data stored there. The categories are based on
the general nature of the recording as it relates to its criminal justice
purpose along with a pre-defincd retention period associated with that
purpose.

2. Relention periods will be established according to the criminal justice
purpose of the data with guidance from the Library of Virginia General
Schedule. BWC data will be held no longer than useful for purposes of
training or for use in an investigation or prosecution.

3. Officers may install the Mobile App on their personal mobile device and

sync it with their BWC. Officers are encouraged to use the Mobile App to
quickly assign the appropriate category to any recordings that have a
criminal justice purpose.

5.

4. Any audio/video data uploaded into Evidence.com and not assigned a
specific category will be classified as “Uncategorized” and held for a
period of 180 days. after which it will be automatically deleted.
It is the officer’s responsibility to assign the appropriate category. if
applicable, to any recordings made with their BWC using Evidence.com,
Evidence Sync, or Mobile App to ensure that the data is retained for the
appropriate time period associated with its criminal justice purpose.

6. When an officer determines that BWC data will be used as evidence in a

prosecution, it is the primary investigating officer’s responsibility to create
a Case within Evidence.com and add any BWC data to that Case.

7. Officers will not edit, alter, erase. duplicate. copy, share, or othenvise
distribute or disseminate in any manner BWC recordings without prior
written authorization aid approval of the Chief of Police or his designee.

5

8. Officers will not provide access to Evidence.com to anyone outside of the
Danville Police Department unless provided for in a signed Memorandum
of Understanding (MOU) or without prior written authorization and
approval of the Chief of Police orhis designee.

9. The department retains the right to limit or restrict, for any reason at any
time, the viewing or accessing of audio/video data generated from BWCs.
10. Requests for deletion of portions of the recordings (e.g., in the event of a

persona! recording) must be submitted in writing and approved by the
Chief of Police or his designee. All requests and final decisions shall be
kept on file.

11. In general. BWC data ‘viii not be released outside of the Danvifle Police
Department except tinder discovery, subpoena. court order, MOU. or as
provided for under the Virginia Freedom of Information Act.

12. Requests for non-evidentiary BWC data that does not fall within the scope
of E.l I will be made in v.Titing and approved by the Chief of Police or his
designee before being released.

13. Officers are encouraged to inform their supervisor of any recordings that

may be of value for training purposes.

F. Supervisory’ Responsibilities

1. Supervisors will ensure that officers assigned BWCs use them in

accordance with this policy and procedure.

2. Supervisors will randomly review BWC recordings to ensure that the
equipment is operating properly and that officers are using the devices
appropriately and in accordance with policy and to identil’ any areas in
which additional training or guidance is required.

6

