Town of Hurt Police Department

Chief RD. Rowland

533 Pocket Road

P0 Box 760

Hurt, Va. 24563

Voice (434)324-4411
(434) 324-9247
Fax

July 14, 2015

American Civil Liberties Union of Virginia
Aim: Mr. Frank Knaack
701 E. Franklin Street
Suite 1412
Richmond, VA 23219

Dear Mr. Knaack,

Per our earlier conversation I am sending you a copy of the Town of Hurt Police

Departments, policy on Body Worn Cameras (BWC). The policy is and will continue to be
a working/living document as more information and knowledge of the use of BWC is
gained.

I feel that the policy I have implemented provides the best protection and service for the
If you

rights of the citizens that I serve as well as the Officers that serve with and for me.
have any questions concerning the policy please feel free to contact me.

Sincerely,

4 440J

Ronald D. Rowland
Chief of Police
Town of Hurt

ACLU

AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION
of VIRGINIA

June 12,2015

Hun Police Department
Ann: FOIA Officer
P.O. Box 760
Hurt, VA 24563

AMERICAN CIVIL
LIBERTIES UNION OF
VIRGINIA

FRANKLIN ST.

SUITE
RICHMOND, VA 23219
T/804.644.BaBo
WWW.ACLUVA.ORG

Re: FOIA Request / Body Camera Equipment and Policy

Dear Ann: FOIA Officer:

This letter is a request under the Virginia Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), Va. Code
§ 2.2-3 700 et seq. This request seeks records regarding law enforcement worn body
cameras, also referred to as police body cameras or body-worn cameras (hereinafter
“body cameras”).

Records Requested

Please provide copies of the following records:

1. All policies, practices, procedures, rules, or orders concerning the use of body

cameras, including:

a. policies or procedures governing use of body cameras;
b. what types of data are obtained;
c.
d.
e.
f.

the conditions under which body cameras arc used;
the frequency of body camera use;
the number of body camera units or systems acquired; and
the number of officers equipped with body cameras;

2. All policies, practices, procedures, rules, or orders concerning the review of body
camera data by supervising officers or staff or civilian review personnel to ensure
officer compliance with department or agency policies and applicable state and
federal law;

3. All policies, practices, procedures, rules, or orders concerning the storage of data

obtained using body cameras, including:

a. where the data is stored;
b. how long data is stored;
c. when data must be discarded; and
d. how much data your agency or department currently stores;

4. All policies, practices, procedures, rules, or orders concerning access to body

camera data, including:

& the legal justification required before a law enforcement employee or
b. member of the public may access body camera data;

c. purposes for which the data may be accessed;
d. purposes for which the data may not be accessed;
e. who may access the data, what procedures they must go through to obtain

access, and who must authorize access; and
the existence of a system that records who accesses the data and when the
data is accessed;

f.

AMERICAN CIVIL

UNION OF

701 E. FRANKLIN ST.
SUITE 1412
RICHMOND, VA 23219
17004,644.8080
WWW.ACLUVA.ORG

5. All policies, practices, procedures, rules, or orders concerning the sharing of data

obtained through body cameras, including:

is shared;

a. what t’pe of
b. what databases your agency puts collected body camera data into: and
c.

third parties, governmental or private, that may access your agency’s body
camera data, including what procedures a third party must go through to
access the data and any restrictions placed on a third party regarding
further sharing of your body camera data;

6. All agreements to share body camera data with outside agencies or departments,

corporations, or other entities; and

7. MI training materials used to instruct members of your department or agency in
body camera deployment, data management, or operation of automated records
systems that contain body camera data to which any member of your department
or agency has access, including regional or shared databases.

Please inform me in advance if the cost of complying with this request will be greater
than $50.

If the requested documents are available in electronic form, please e-mail them to me at
flcnaackac1uva.org. Otherwise, please mail them to meat ACLU of Virginia, 701 F
Franldin Street. Suite 1412, Richmond, Virginia 23219. Please respond within five (5)
business days as required by FOJA. Thank you for your prompt attention to this matter. If
you have questions, please contact me at flcnaackacluva.org 01(804) 523-2144.

Sincerely,

Frank Knaack
Director, Public Policy and Communications

1 “Data” or “body camera dab” means any data recorded by a body camera.

Town of Hurt Police Department

RULES AND REGULATIONS

SUBJECT: Body —Worn Cameras
(BWCs)

NUMBER: 2-1 5A

EFFECTIVE DATE: July 12, 2015
AMENDS/SUPERSEDES: ALL
PRIOR

REVIEW DATE: July 1, 2017
APPROVED: Lesczo. ,
Ronald D. Rowland, Chief of Police

NOTE

This order is for internal use only, and does not enlarge an officer’s civil or criminal liability in any way.
It
should not be considered as the creation of a higher standard of safety or care in an evidentiary sense, with
respect to third-party claims. Violations of this directive, if proven, can only form the basis of a complaint by
this department, and then only in a non-judicial administrative setting.

PURPOSE

This policy is intended to provide officers with instructions on when and how to use
the body-worn cameras (BWCs) so that officers may reliably record their contracts
with the public in accordance with the law.

II.

POLICY

It is the policy of The Town of Hurt Police Department that officers shall activate the
BWC when such use is appropriate to proper performance of his or her official duties,
where the recordings are consistent with this policy and law. This policy does not
govern the use of surreptitious recording devices used in undercover operations.

III.

PROCEDURES

A. Administration:

This agency has adopted the use of the BWC to accomplish several objectives. The
primary objectives are as follows:

1. BWCs allow for accurate documentation of police-public contacts, arrests, and
critical incidents. They also serve to enhance the accuracy of officer reports and
testimony in court.

2-15A-l

2. Audio and video recordings also enhance this agency’s ability to review probable
cause for arrest, officer and suspect interaction, and evidence for investigative and
prosecutorial purposes and to provide additional information for officer
evaluation and training.

3. The BWC may also be useful in documenting crime and accident scenes or other
events that include the confiscation and documentation of evidence or contraband.

B. When and how to Use the BWC:

I. Officers shall activate the BWC to record all contacts with citizens in the

performance of duties.

2. Whenever possible, officers should inform individuals that they are being

recorded. In locations where individuals have a reasonable expectation of privacy.
such as a residence, they may decline to he recorded unless the recording is being
made in pursuant to an arrest or search of the residence or the individuals. The
BWC shall remain activated until the event is completed in order to ensure the
integrity of the recording unless the contact moves into an area restricted by this
policy (see items D. 1-4).

3.

If an officer fails to activate the BWC, fails to record the entire contact, or
interrupts the recording, the officer shall document why a recording was not
made, was interrupted, or was terminated.

4. Civilians shall not be allowed to review the recordings at the scene.

C. Procedures for BWC Use:

I. BWC equipment is issued primarily to uniformed personnel as authorized by this

agency. Officers who are assigned BWC equipment must use the equipment
unless otherwise authorized by supervisory personnel.

2. Police personnel shall use only BWCs issued by this department. The BWC
equipment and all data, images, video, and metadata captured, recorded, or
otherwise produced by the equipment is the sole property of the agency.

3. Police personnel who are assigned BWCs must complete an agency approved

and/or provided training program to ensure proper use and operations. Additional
training may be required at periodic intervals to ensure the continued effective use

2-15A-2

and operation of the equipment, proper calibration and perfonTlance, and to
incorporate changes, updates, or other revisions in policy and equipment.

4. BWC equipment is the responsibility of individual officers and will be used with

reasonable care to ensure proper ffinctioning. Equipment malfunctions shall be
brought to the attention of the officer’s supervisor as soon as possible so that a
replacement unit may be procured.

5. Officers shall inspect and test the BWC prior to each shift in order to verify

proper functioning and shall notif,’ their supervisor of any problems.

6. Officers shall not edit, alter, erase, duplicate, copy, share, or otherwise distribute
in any manner BWC recordings without prior written authorization and approval
of the Chief of Police or his or her designee.

7. Officers are encouraged to inform their supervisor of any recordings that may be

of value for training purposes.

8.

If an officer is suspected of wrongdoing or involved in an officer-involved
shooting or other serious use of force, the department reserves the right to limit or
restrict an officer from viewing the video file.

9. Requests for deletion of portions of the recordings (e.g., in the event of a personal

recording) must be submitted in writing and approved by the Chief of Police or
his or her designee in accordance with state record retention laws. All requests
and final decisions shall be kept on file.

10. Officers shall note in incident, arrest, and related reports when recordings were

made during the incident in question. However. BWC recordings are not a
replacement for written reports.

D. Restrictions on Using the BWC.

BWCs shall be used only in conjunction with official law enforcement duties. The
BWC shall not generally be used to record

I. Communication with other police personnel without permission of the Chief

of Police.

2. Encounters with undercover officers or confidential informants;

2-I 5A-3

3. When on break or otherwise engaged in personal activities; or

4.

In any location where individuals have a reasonable expectation of privacy,
such as a restroom or locker room.

B: Storage:

1. All files shall be securely downloaded onto the Evidence.com account for the specific

officer, periodically and no later than the end of each shift. Each file shall contain
information related to the date, BWC identifier, and assigned officer.

2. All images and sounds recorded by the BWC are the exclusive property of this

department. Accessing, copying, or releasing files for non-law enforcement purposes
is strictly prohibited.

3. All access to BWC data (images, sounds, and metadata) must be specifically

authorized by the Chief of Police or his or her designee, and all access is to be audited
to ensure that only authorized users are accessing the data for legitimate and
authorized purposes.

4. Files should be securely stored in accordance with state records retention laws and no

longer than useful for purposes of training or for use in an investigation or
prosecution. In capital punishment prosecutions, recordings shall be kept until the
offender is no longer under control of a criminal justice agency.

5. Files that do not have any evidentiary need will be maintained for 90 days.

6. Files needed for case investigation will be downloaded onto a DVDR and

secured/stored with the case master file.

F. Supervisor Responsibilities

1. Supervisory personnel shall ensure that officers equipped with BWC devices utilize

them in accordance with policy and procedures defined herein.

2. At least on a monthly basis, supervisors will randomly review BWC recordings to

ensure that the equipment is operating properly and that officers are using the devices
appropriately and in accordance with policy and to identify any areas in which
additional training or guidance is required.

2-1 5A-4

