 

TOWN OF ORANGE POLICE DEPT.      

 GENERAL ORDER 

SUBJECT: MOBILE VEHICLE VIDEO 
RECORDER (MVR)/WEARABLE 
VIDEO RECODER (WVR) 

EFFECTIVE DATE:  23 JAN 2015 
 

  NUMBER:  2-49 

  REVIEW DATE: 1 JAN 2016 

AMENDS/SUPERSEDES:  16 SEP 2013 
 

  APPROVED: James L. Fenwick 
                           Chief of Police 

VLEPSC STANDARDS: OPR.0.11 
 

 

 
 
 

NOTE:   
 

This rule or regulation is for internal use only, and does not enlarge an officer's civil 
or  criminal  liability  in  any  way.    It  should  not  be  construed  as  the  creation  of  a 
higher standard of safety or care in an evidentiary sense, with respect to third party 
claims.    Violations  of  this  directive,  if  proven,  can  only  form  the  basis  of  a 
complaint by this department, and then only in a non-judicial administrative setting. 

 
 

 
 
 
 
I. POLICY: 
 
 

 

Mobile  video/audio  recording  (MVR)  and  Wearable  Video  Recording  (WVR)  equipment 
has  been  demonstrated  to  be  of  value  in  the  prosecution  of  traffic  violations  and  related 
offenses, in evaluation of officer performance and as well as for training. It has also proven 
invaluable in refuting claims of officer misconduct. In order to maximize the usefulness of 
the equipment in these and related areas, officers shall follow the procedures for MVR and 
WVR  equipment  set  forth  in  this  policy.    All  recording  media,  images,  and  audio  are 
property  of  the  Town  of  Orange  Police  Department  and will not  be copied, released, or 
disseminated  in  any  form  or  manner  outside  the  parameters  of  this  policy  without  the 
expressed  written  consent  of  the  Chief  of  Police.  Under  no  circumstances  will  any 
member of the Town of Orange Police Department make a personal copy of any recorded 
event  without 
Police. 
                                                     

prior  written 

the  Chief 

of 

permission 

of 

 
II. 
 
 

 

 

PURPOSE: 

It is the purpose of this policy to provide officers with guidelines for the use of mobile and 
wearable video and audio recording equipment.  

2-49.1 

 
 
III. 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

PROCEDURES: 

A. 

Equipment Operation- Mobile Video Recorder (MVR): 

 

1. 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

2. 

 
3. 

4. 
 
 
 
 
5. 

The  officers  who  are  assigned  digital  mobile  video  recorder  equipped 
vehicles  will  be  responsible  for  the  proper  use  and  care  of  the  equipment. 
The current system being used is the Digital Ally DVM-100 digital recorder. 
Video  is  recorded  by  way  of  a  32GB  Secure  Digital  (SD)  card,  secured in 
the  recorder  by  way  of  a  security  bolt.  It  will  be  operated  and  maintained 
according 
instructions  and  recommendations.  The 
wireless  body  mics  will  be  kept  on  the  chargers  in  the  police  department 
building to ensure that they are being charged properly. Officers must ensure 
that they are using the correct mic for their assigned vehicle.  

to  manufacturer’s 

No  alterations  will  be  made  to  the  video  equipment  settings  with  the 
exception  to  set  the  proper  date,  time  and/or  the  night  mode.  Officers  are 
responsible  for  notifying  their  Sergeant  if  there  is  an  issue  with  the  mic 
holster or wired microphone.  

Officers  will  determine  if  the  video  recorder  is  working  properly  at  the 
beginning of their shift. Any malfunctions will be reported to a supervisor as 
soon as possible. 

 

The recorder is activated by: 
 
 
 

a. activating the emergency equipment 
b. Manually pressing the record button 
c. Turning on the wireless microphone 

When  the  video  and  audio  is  recording  a  police  contact  involving  a traffic 
infraction or criminal activity, it will not be turned off until the contact has 
ended  and  the  citizen  or  officer  has  left  the  scene.  If  an  arrest  occurs,  the 
internal  recorder  will  stay  activated  until  the  officer  arrives  at  his/her 
destination and has removed the suspect from the vehicle. Officers may stop 
recording  during  non-enforcement  activities  or  when  there  is  no  citizen 
contact, but should realize that the MVR is a powerful tool to refute claims 
of  police  misconduct.  Officers  shall  not  attempt  to  bypass  the  video/audio 
recorder  by  using  alternative  means  of  lighting  (i.e.,  using  vehicle  hazard 
flashers when the vehicle emergency lights would be required for safety), or 
purposely leaving the body mic turned off so it does not record the officer’s 
voice even if the video recorder is activated.  

 

6. 

Officers  will  ensure  that  the  video/audio  recorder  is  properly  recording 

2-49.2 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

B. 
 

traffic stops and enforcement actions. Note- the video system has a self time-
out feature that will turn the unit off if the vehicle has been sitting without 
running for a period of time. The lighted blue LED below the display screen 
indicates  that  the  unit  is  powered  on  and  ready  to  record  when  activated. 
Officers will ensure that the unit is on and ready to be used when they get 
back into their assigned vehicle if it has been parked and not running for a 
period of time.   

7. 

8. 

Officers are prohibited from tampering with or opening the recording device.  

Officers will not attempt to delete or alter the video recordings. Attempting 
to  do  so  may  be  construed  as  attempting  to  falsify  or  destroy work related 
materials, which could lead to dismissal or criminal prosecution, depending 
on the circumstances.  

Retrieval and Storage of Recordable Media 

1.  The  mobile  video  recorder  system  and  recorded  media  is  the  property  of  the 
Town  of  Orange  Police  Department  and  are  not  to  be  copied  without  the 
permission of the Chief of Police.  

 
2.  The equipment is installed with a locking bolt to restrict access to the recorded 
media. Supervisors will have access to keys for retrieval of the recorded media 
that  has  reached  its  maximum  capacity,  or  if  there  is  a  need  to  download  a 
recorded  event  for  evidentiary  purposes.  The  original  copy  of  the  downloaded 
incident will be stored as evidence.   

3.  Recorded incidents that are not of evidentiary value will be kept indefinitely for 
now. A Supervisor shall be responsible for checking the SD card memory status 
of  each  unit,  and  downloading  the  SD  cards  to  the  proper  storage  device  at  a 
minimum of every two weeks.  

4.  Officers  will  notify  the  shift  supervisor  as  soon  as  practical  of  a  recorded 
incident  that  has  evidentiary  value.  The  shift  supervisor  will  determine  if  the 
recorded incident should be removed immediately to preserve evidence, and will 
access the SD card to make a copy of the incident.  

5.  Recorded incidents that are determined to be of evidentiary value will be treated 

as evidence. Refer to 2-19 Property and Evidence for evidence procedures. 

6.  Officers  are  encouraged  to  inform  a  supervisor  of  any  recorded  incidents  that 

may be of value for training purposes. 

2-49.3 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

C. 
 

 

D. 
 

 

7.  If  an  incident  report  is  completed for a recorded event, officers will document 

that fact in the narrative of the IBR.  

 

 
Use of Media in Court 

1.  When a recorded incident is required for prosecution, a duplicate in DVD format 
will be provided. The original will be kept in storage until the legal process is 
complete, and as long as needed. 

 
2.  The requesting officer will place the duplicate copy in Property & Evidence. It 

will remain there until the legal process is complete. 

 
3.  Officers  will  notify  the  courts  and Commonwealth’s Attorney before trial date 
that  a  video  will  be  presented  as  evidence  to  ensure  that  a  video  player  and 
monitor are available.  

Equipment Operation- Wearable Video Recorder (WVR): 

1.  Department issued WVR's are intended for official Departmental use only 

and are not to be used for frivolous or personal activities. Intentional 
misuse or abuse of the units will result in disciplinary action.  

 
2.  Uniformed Officers will use only those WVR's issued and approved by the 

Department. The wearing of personal video recorders is not authorized. 
The Department currently uses the TASER AXON BODY camera. The 
Axon body is automatically uploaded by use of the docking station to 
Evidence.com or by way of the issued USB cable with the TASER SYNC 
website.  

3.  WVR's will be assigned to individual officers. 

 
  
a.  The issuance of each WVR will be documented and maintained in the 
Department’s RMS system. Uniformed officers shall wear the WVR while 
on duty.  
 
b. WVR's will not be rotated at shift change and will remain the 
responsibility of each assigned officer. 
 

2-49.4 

 

 

4.  Officer Responsibility 

Any problems preventing the use of the unit during the shift will be 

 
a.  
Prior to beginning a shift, officers assigned a WVR will ensure its 
readiness by conducting an operational inspection. When not in use during 
working hours, the unit shall be turned off and kept plugged in to charge. 
Willful failure to properly maintain battery life by not keeping the unit 
plugged in when not in use may result in disciplinary action for failing to 
maintain assigned equipment.  
 
b.  
reported to the immediate supervisor. 
 
c.  
Police. 
 
e.  
and any self-initiated enforcement activities utilizing their police powers. 
Any other activation shall be at the discretion of the officer, and officers 
shall be prepared to justify why the camera was activated. Cameras will 
not be activated during any meetings between supervisors and officers, or 
any contacts with fellow officers outside of the mandatory use guidelines.  

Problems that cannot be remedied will be reported to the Chief of 

Officers shall activate their body cameras on all calls for service 

 

5. 

Individual officers are responsible for uploading video to the 

 
f.  
Evidence.com website.  The officer will “tag” their own videos with the 
appropriate classifications and case number. At this time, only Sergeants 
and above may share the videos with entities outside of the Department. 
Officers shall notify their supervisor if a particular video needs to be sent 
to the Commonwealth’s Attorney or outside agency. Videos may be 
forwarded to other attorneys only after being cleared to do so through the 
Commonwealth’s Attorney. The Evidence.com Audit Trail feature tracks 
all activity involving the video. See Section E for further guidelines 
regarding viewing of videos.  
 
 Supervisor Responsibility 
 
a. 
according to policy guidelines. 
 
b. 
assess officer performance as well as flag videos that may be appropriate 
for training purposes. 

 It is incumbent on supervisors to ensure officers utilize WVR's 

 Supervisors may conduct random reviews of recordings in order to 

 

 

2-49.5 

 

 
 

 

  

 
3.  
If a complaint is associated with a recorded event, or an officer 
believes an incident may generate a complaint, the officer or supervisor 
will flag the video. 
 
D. Video Evidence 
 
See Section C and refer to 2-19 Property and Evidence for evidence 
procedures. 
 
E. Video Purge/Viewing of Video by Citizens 
 
At this time, all video is being kept indefinitely.  All video evidence shall be 
kept according to the recommendations of the Library of Virginia standards.  

 
  All requests by citizens to view video shall be forwarded to the Chief of 

Police. 

F.  Privacy 

 
 
 

1. 

A victim of a crime shall have the right to request that the officer 

turn off the body camera. The request shall be documented on the 
recording before it is turned off by the officer, and shall be documented 
in the report. In situations where officers who have their camera 
activated may encounter people who are nude or partially clothed, the 
officer shall, if safely able to do so, place his or her hand in front of the 
camera and direct the person or persons to cover themselves. NOTE- 
Officer safety measures shall be paramount in this situation.  

 

 

2-49.6 

