COLONIAL HEIGHTS POLICE DEPARTMENT 
Jeffrey W. Faries, Chief of Police 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Operations 
 
Body Worn Cameras 
 
 
 
March 10, 2015 

 
Number: 
 
Effective Date: 
 
Review Date: 
 
VLEPSC: 

 

 

     100-A Highland Avenue 
Colonial Heights, Virginia 23834 
Telephone (804) 520 – 9300 
Fax (804) 520 – 9226 
3-58 
 
April 1, 2015 
 
April 1, 2017 
 
 

 
Category: 
 
Subject: 
 
Reference: 
 
Amends- 
Supersedes 
 
Approved: 

 
Jeffrey W. Faries, Chief of Police     Colonel Jeffrey W. Faries         

 
NOTE: This order is for internal use only, and does not enlarge an officer’s civil or criminal 

liability in any way.  It should not be construed as the creation of a higher standard of 
safety or care in an evidentiary sense, with respect to third party claims.  Violations of 
this directive, if proven, can only form the basis of a complaint by this department, and 
then only in a non-judicial administrative setting. 

 
I.  POLICY: 
 

It shall be the policy of the Colonial Heights Police Department to utilize Body-Worn 
Camera  (BWC)  equipment  to  assist  Department  personnel  in  the  performance  of 
their duties by providing an accurate and unbiased recorded event of an incident.  
Additionally,  to  maximize  effectiveness  of  the  BWC  and  maintain  integrity  of 
evidence and related documentation, all personnel utilizing these devices will adhere 
to the procedures outlined within this policy.  The wearing of a BWC by an assigned 
officer is mandatory and non-compliance with this order could result in disciplinary 
action.    

 
II. PURPOSE: 
 
    The purpose of this policy is to provide guidance on the proper use of the Body-Worn 
    Camera (BWC) and the proper storage of data retrieved by the use of this equipment.           
 
III. DEFINITIONS: 
 

Body-Worn  Camera  (BWC):  A  recording  system  that  captures  audio  and  video 
that  is  individually  worn  by  officers  and  includes,  at  a  minimum,  a  camera  and 
recorder. 

Buffering: The thirty seconds of video prior to activation of the BWC event mode held 
in temporary storage. 

3-58.1 

 

 

 

Evidence  Transfer  Station:  A  docking  station  that  recharges  the  Axon  Tactical 
Computer (ATC) while uploading to  Evidence.com all data captured from the BWC 
operator’s point of view during the operator’s shift. 
 
Evidence.com:  The  online  web-based  digital  media  storage  facility  accessed  at 
www.evidence.com.  The  virtual  warehouse  stores  digitally-encrypted  data 
(photographs, audio and video recordings) in a highly-secure environment. 

 

System  Administrator:  Officer(s)  appointed  by  the  Chief  of  Police  with 
full 
administrator  rights  who  assigns  and  tracks  equipment,  controls  passwords, 
acts  as  liaison  with  Taser  Axon  representatives  and  is  the  department’s  subject 
matter expert on body-worn devices. 

     
IV. PROCEDURES – BODY-WORN CAMERA SYSTEM: 

 
Officers assigned a BWC shall don a fully-charged system prior to their tour of duty. 
In  order  to  best  capture  that  which  is  observed  by  an  officer  using  a  BWC,  the 
camera should be located on the head or shoulder area of the officer. Officers shall 
activate  the  BWC  whenever  there  is  a  potential  for  dealing  with  a  suspect  of  a 
crime.  This  would  include,  but  is  not  limited  to,  traffic  stops,  suspicious  person 
contacts, or calls for service. The BWC may also be activated whenever the officer 
feels  its  use  would  be  beneficial  to  his/her  police  duties.  Once  the  camera  is 
activated to the “event” mode, it shall remain on until the police action is complete. 
 
An officer who is lawfully present in an area protected by the Fourth Amendment 
shall  activate  the  BWC  when  there  is  reasonable  suspicion  that a  crime  is  being 
committed, has been committed, or is about to be committed, or that evidence of a 
crime is present. In the absence of such criteria, the officer must turn off the BWC if 
asked  to  do  so  by  a  person  with  apparent  authority  over  the  constitutionally-
protected  area.  As  a  reminder,  entry  into  a  Fourth  Amendment  protected  area 
requires  probable  cause  and  a  warrant  or  warrant  exception.    (ex.  Magistrates 
Office/Judges Chambers/Clerk of Courts Office/Medical Facility) 
 
Inspections and maintenance of the BWC shall be the responsibility of the assigned 
officer.  Only  authorized  personnel  to  whom  a  recording  system  is  assigned  may 
use, touch or handle that recording system. Unauthorized personnel shall not use, 
touch or handle any recording system. 
 
At the end of a Officer’s tour of duty, the recording system will be placed into the 
assigned docking station slot on the Evidence Transfer Station located in the squad 
room at Police Headquarters. The recording system should not be removed from 
the  Evidence  Transfer  Station  until  all  of  the  data  has  been  uploaded  and  the 
battery has been fully charged.  Any functionality or serviceability problems shall be 
reported  to  their  supervisor  immediately,  who  will  then  notify  the  System 
Administrator.   
 

 

3-58.2 

At the end of the officer’s tour, he or she will mark any video related to a criminal or 
traffic case, or that may be useful to the Department for training purposes.  (This 
includes arrests/search warrants/traffic stops conducted by other officers).  When 
marking video, the officer will ensure that the appropriate category is selected.  The 
categories  are  Evidentiary,  Non-Evidentiary  or  Training/Demo.    All  Evidentiary 
cases  must  include  the  case  number  as  the  Video  ID.    Non-Evidentiary  cases 
should  include  at  a  minimum  a  brief  description  of  the  incident  and/or  a  case 
number.     
 
Once  an  officer  determines  that  Evidentiary  video  is  no  longer  needed,  (i.e. 
adjudicated in court) the officer will re-categorize that particular video to either Non-
Evidentiary or Training/Demo in order to purge video that is no longer needed.   
 

 V. DOCUMENTATION: 
 

Officers will document the use of any video recording system in reports, citations, 
affidavits,  field  interviews,  etc.  Before  writing  reports  involving  the  response  to 
resistance,  critical  incidents,  confessions  or  admissions,  officers  will  review  any 
video.  Officers  are  encouraged  to  review  available  video  while  preparing  written 
reports to ensure accuracy. 
 
Note: The BWC records at a level beyond human ocular capability. 
 

 
   The following uses of Body worn recording systems are strictly prohibited: 
 

1.  Using a mobile video recording system to take a statement in lieu of a sworn 

written statement, unless approved by a supervisor. 

2.  Video-recording undercover officers or confidential informants. 
3.  Duplicating or distributing recordings for other than official law enforcement 

 VI. RESTRICTIONS: 

purposes. 

4.  Permitting  citizens 

to  review  recordings 

for  other 

than  official 

enforcement purposes. 
5.  Altering captured data. 
6.  Accessing  recordings  for  other  than  case-related  purposes,  responses  to 
to 

resistance, 
established policy or as directed by the Chief of Police or designee. 

legal  review,  pursuant 

formal  or 

informal  complaints, 

7.  Making or creating, by separate device or otherwise, a copy of any recording 

law 

except as directed by the Chief of Police or designee. 

8.  Posting to social media sites without approval by the Chief of Police. 

 

 VII. SYSTEM ADMINISTRATOR: 
 

The  Mobile  Video  System  Administrator  is  responsible  for  overall  maintenance, 
management, training and retention, and acts as a liaison between the Department 

 

3-58.3 

and Taser. The System Administrator reports to the Chief of Police or his designee. 
 

VIII. CONFIDENTIALITY: 
 

All recording media, images, and audio are property of the City of Colonial Heights 
Police Department and will not be copied, released, or disseminated in any form or 
manner outside the parameters of this policy without the expressed written consent 
of the Chief of Police or his designee.  Under no circumstances will any employee 
of the Colonial Heights Police Department make a personal copy of any recorded 
event without prior written permission from the Chief of Police or his designee.  

 
IX. RETENTION: 

 
Videos  that  are  categorized  as  Evidentiary  or  Training/Demo  will  be  maintained 
until they no longer serve a law enforcement purpose.  After which videos will be 
re-categorized  by  the  officer  or  System  Administrator  as  Non-Evidentiary  and 
purged from the system.  Non-Evidentiary videos will be purged from the system no 
sooner than 30 days from their upload or re-categorization.  Videos maintained in 
the system that have are considered “Uncategorized” will also be purged from the 
system no sooner than 30 days from their upload.       

 
X. VIDEO SHARING: 

 
At  times,  officers  will  be  asked  to  share  video  evidence  that  they  have  collected 
with outside agencies such as the Commonwealth Attorney’s Office.  Officers are 
permitted  to  share  with  the  Commonwealth  Attorney’s  Office  as  well  as  any 
Federal, State or Local agency that is in need of the video for a law enforcement 
purpose  for  a  duration  that  satisfies  that  purpose.    Additionally,  officers  are 
permitted  to  allow  that  evidence  to  be  downloaded  by  the  requesting  agency  for 
their  law  enforcement  purpose  if  necessary.    Any  other  request  for  video,  either 
Evidentiary, Non-Evidentiary or Training/Demo, shall be approved in writing by the 
Chief of Police or his designee prior to release.    

 
XI.TRAINING: 

 
Officers shall be trained and receive instruction prior to being assigned a BWC. 

 

 

3-58.4 

