JL.H7ERsnv
[/LRGTNIA
1W! Ur’uimsnv POLICE

June 19. 2015

American Civil Liberties Union of Virginia
701 E. Franklin Street. Suite 1412
Richmond, VA 23219

<:

Mr. Frank Knaack:

In response to your request. enclosed is the only document responsive to your request.

Sincerely,

Michael A. Coleman

2304 Ivy Road Charlottesville. VA 229034970
434-924-7166 Fax: 434-982-2817
vww.virginia.edu!uvapolice

WRITTEN DIRECTIVE

No. E-75.O

Page:

1 of 6

.

Subject:

Body Worn Cameras

Effective Date:
June 23, 20b
Supersedes/Amends:

-

Reference: 41.3.8

LIST OF CONTENTS:

II.
III.

IV.

Original Digital Recording
Downloaded Digital Recording
BWC

POLICY
PURPOSE
DEFTNITIONS
A.
B.
C.
PROCEDURES
A. Administration
B. When and How to Use the BWC
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.

Procedures for Use
Restrictions
Review of BWC System Recordings
Digital Recordings as Evidence
Storage, Retention and Disposal of Digital Recordings
Training

I.

POLICY

It is the policy of the University of Virginia Police Department that officers shall use
digital mobile video/audio recorder equipment, or the Body Worn Camera (BWC), for
recording objective accounts of events as they occur. This policy does not govern the
use of surreptitious recording devices used in undercover operations. BWC equipment
shall be used onJy as set forth in this directive. Officers who deviate from the guidelines
set forth may be subject to disciplinary action. Responsibility rests with the Law
Enforcement Captain to ensure that any violations of policy are investigated and
appropriate training, counseling and/or disciplinary action is initiated.

II.

PURPOSE

The purpose of this directive is to establish procedures for the operation of BWC
equipment and for the collection, safeguarding. and storage of BWC recordings.

III.

DEFiNITIONS

Original Digital Recording: the audio/video signal from the BWC that is stored in the
cloud at Evidence.corn

Doii1oaded Digital Recording: any reproduction of the original digital recording

Body Worn Cameras

Page 2 of 6

E-75.O

BWC: Body Worn Camera

IV.

PROCEDURES

A.

ADMINISTRATION

The University of Virginia Police Department has adopted the use of the Body
Worn Camera (BWC) to accomplish several objectives, including:

41.3.8 (a)

I. Allowing for accurate documentation of police-public contacts, arrests, and

critical incidents and enhancing the accuracy of officer reports and testimony
in court

2. Enhancing the ability of the agency to review probable cause for arrest, officer
and suspect interaction, evidence for investigative and prosecutorial purposes,
and to provide additional information for officer evaluation and training

3. Documenting crime and accident scenes or other events that include the

confiscation and documentation of evidence or contraband

4. Enhancing the department’s levels of professionalism, service, and

community policing objectives.

B. WHEN AND HOW TO USE THE BWC

1. Except as otherwise provided in this directive, officers assigned BWCs shall

wear them at all times while on duty and utilize them to record any and all law
enforcement events and citizen contact for law enforcement purposes in which
they are participating (which includes conversations occurring during such
events or contacts to which the officers are parties or where their presence is
otherwise apparent to the parties).

2. Officers must activate their BWCs during the following situations u&ess

doing so would be impractical or unsafe:

41.3.8 (b)

a. Traffic stops and accident investigations

b. Foot pursuits

c. Response or pursuit driving

d. Terry stops and pat downs

e. MI vehicle and subject searches (including vehicle inventories)

f MI law enforcement-related interactions where criminal activity is being

actively investigated

3. The recording shall continue until the law enforcement event or citizen

contact is completed, the citizen involved departs, or the officer discontinues
his/her participation in the law enforcement event or citizen contact.

Body Worn Cameras

Page 3 of 6

E-75.O

4.

5.

6.

If an officer deems it necessary to disengage his/her BWC during a law
enforcement event or citizen contact, he/she should first utilize the recorder to
record a verbal statement citing his/her intention to stop the recording, the
reason(s) for doing so. and any other pertinent information, and shall notify
his/her supervisor as soon as practical so that the circumstances can be
properly documented.

In the event of any officer involved use of force, no officer present at the
scene shall disengage his/her BWC until directed to do so by a supervisor.

If an officer participating in a law enforcement event or citizen contact
becomes aware that the event or contact was unintentionally not recorded by
his/her assigned BWC. the officer shall notify his/her immediate supervisor as
soon as practical so that the information can be documented and the problem
addressed.

7. Each officer assigned the use of a BWC shall wear the recorder as directed by
the manufacturer to optimize its video/audio perspecuves, and shall make all
reasonable efforts to ensure that the BWC is capturing events as accurately
and completely as possible. Reasonable efforts include:

a. Activating the BWC as soon as the law enforcement event or citizen

contact begins, and

b. Activating the BWC when the officer arrives at a law enforcement event

or citizen contact initiated by another officer

8. Officers shall not erase. alter, modify, or in any way tamper with BWC

recordings. Any officer causing or becoming aware of any such damage to a
BWC recording shall notify his/her immediate supervisor as soon as practical.

NOTE: Officers may exercise discretion in deciding whether or not to activate
their BWCs in certain circumstances such as when providing basic assistance
or directions to citizens, engaging in community policing events, and building
checks.

C.

PROCEDURES FOR USE

1. Departmental personnel who are issued BWC equipment must use the

equipment unless otherwise authorized by supervisory personnel.

2. All sworn officers shall be issued BWC equipment for use while on duty.

3. Police personnel shall only use department-issued BWCs.

4. Police personnel who are assigned BWCs must complete a department

approved training program to ensure proper use and operation. BWC
equipment will be used in accordance with the manufacturer’s guidelines.

5. The use of personal BWC recording devices is strictly prohibited.

Body Worn Cameras

Page 4 of 6

E-75.O

6.

7.

It shall be the responsibility of each officer assiuned the use of BWCs to test
the recorder at the beginning of each tour of duty and to ensure that the
recorder’s batteries are hilly charged.

31.3.8 e

In the event that a BWC is found to be non-functioning or functioning
improperly. the officer shall notify his/her immediate supervisor as soon as
practical so that the information can be properly documented and the problem
addressed.

8. Officers are encouraged to inform their supervisor of any video/audio

recorded sequences that may be of value during the investigation of a citizen
complaint or for training purposes.

9.

If an officer is suspected of wrongdoing or is involved in an officer-involved
shooting or other use of force incident, the department reserves the right to
limit or restrict an officer from viewing the video file except as provided by
law.

10. Requests for edits/deletions of portions of original or downloaded recordings
(i.e.. in the event of an accidental, personal recording) must be submitted in
writing and approved by the Chief of Police or designee in accordance with
records retention regulations. All requests and final decisions shall be
maintained on file.

D.

RESTRICTIONS

1. The use of Body Worn Camera equipment for purposes other than official
police business is strictly prohibited. BWC equipment shall not be used to
record:

41 38(b)

a. Communications with other police personnel without the permission of the

Chief of Police or designee

b. Encounters with undercover officers or confidential informants

c. When on break or otherwise engaged in personal activities

d.

In any location where individuals have a reasonable expectation of
privacy, such as a restroom or locker room, unless pursuit of a suspect led
to that location or the incident is criminal in namre.

2. Should an officer be unsure as to whether or not the BWC should be activated,

the officer shall always en on the side of recording.

3. Whenever a copy of a downloaded digital recording is made and provided to

another agency or office in connection with a criminal, civil, or administrative
investigation or proceeding or other official matter, a duplicate copy shall be
maintained and accompanied by a notation identifying the agency or office
receiving the copy, and the proceeding or matter for which the copy was
provided.

Body Worn Cameras

Page 5 of 6

E-75.O

E.

REVIEW OF BWC SYSTEM RECORDINGS

1. Each officer assigied the use of a BWC shall download its recordings and tag
the recordings in Evidence.com no later than at the end of each shift unless a -
supervisor approves a delay or extension. The reason for the delay or
extension shall be documented in writing by the supervisor.

41.3.8 (d)

2.

Fh.e BWC equipment and all data, images, video, and metadata captured,
recorded, or otherwise produced by the equipment are the sole and exclusive
property of the University of Virginia Police Department. Accessing. copying,
or releasing files is strictly prohibited except as approved by the Chief of
Police.

3. All access to BWC files will be strictly monitored periodically by the Chief of

Police or his/her designee.

4. Recordings may be reviewed:

a. By an authorized person to ensure that the BWC system is operable

b. By an authorized person to assist with writing a report, supplement, or

memorandum

c. By authorized persons for the purpose of reviewing evidence

d. By a supervisor investigating a specific act of employee conduct

e. By authorized department personnel participating in an official

investigation, such as a personnel complaint, administrative inquiry, or
criminal investigation

f By an authorized person as otherwise provided herein.

5. Recordings may be shown for the purpose of training. If an involved

employee objects to showing a recording, his/her objection shall be submitted
in writing to his/her supervisor to determine if the training value outweighs
the objection.

6. At no time shall any officer allow any unauthorized person to review any
portion of a video/audio recording without prior approval of the Chef of
Police or his/her designee.

7. Each officer shall be audited monthly by his/her supervisor in a review of at

least two videos per month to ensure that officers are using the devices
appropriately and in accordance with policy, as well as to identify areas in
which additional training or guidance is required. The audits will be
documented.

F.

DIGITAL RECORDINGS AS EVIDENCE

1. Any original digital recording shall be viewed by the officer prior to

downloading so that the officer can testify that a downloaded copy used as

41.3.8 Ic)

41.3.8 (c o)

Body Worn Cameras

Page 6 of 6

E-75.O

evidence is an unaltered copy.

2. Original digital recordings or downloaded digital recordings constituting

41.3.8 (d)

evidence in any criminal, civil, or administrative investigation or proceeding
shall be retained for so long as the investigation or proceeding remains active
and for such additional time as required by law.

3.

If an original digital recording or downloaded digital recording is related to a
pending criminal case or an ongoing or active criminal investigation, the
officer shall tag the recording with the corresponding IBR.

4. A copy of the downloaded digital recording shall then be provided to the

Office of the Commonwealth Attorney along with copies of any other relevant
materials in the officer’s case file and the dissemination recorded.

5. Officers shall utilize their department-assigned Evidence.com accounts to

retrieve recordings.

6. Any other request for release of BWC recordings will be directed to the

Support Services Captain or designee. This includes subpoenas duces tecum.
other legal petitions, and requests under the Freedom of Information Act.

G.

STORAGE. RETENTION AND DISPOSAL OF DIGITAL RECORDINGS

41.3.8 (ci)

1. Original digital recordings not made into a downloaded recording will

automatically be purged 90 days after creation.

2. Original digital recordings made into a downloaded recording shall be entered
into evidence or otherwise preserved and shall be handled in accordance with
evidence retention schedules.

NOTE: All recordings will be managed in compliance with the Library of
Virginia Records Retention and Disposition Schedules.

H.

TRAINING

I. Employees shall be fully trained prior to operating any portion of the BWC

equipment.

41.3.8(0

2. Training shall be conducted by department-assigned trainers.

3. All training in the use of BWC equipment will be documented for inclusion in

each employee’s training record.

..Z Michael A. Gibson

Chi..of Police

/

‘Date

