Gordonsville Police Department – GENERAL ORDER
 
GO 59  Body Worn Camcorder 
 

 

Original Signature on file maintained in GPD Records Division 

Clayton D. Corbin, Chief of Police 

Effective Date:  05/31/2013 

Revised Date:   

VLEPSC Standards:  

To  establish  policy  and  guidelines  for  electronic  data  collection  resulting  from  the  use  of  body 
worn audio/visual camcorders (BWC). It also serves to direct patrol officers and their supervisors 
in the proper use and maintenance of the BWC. The purpose of the BWC is to provide an accurate 
unbiased audio/visual record of enforcement related and non-criminal incidents that will enhance 
criminal prosecutions and limit civil liabilities. 

Patrol Officers of the Gordonsville Police Department shall use the issued BWC when interaction 
with the public will potentially result in further enforcement action , or any situation, condition, or 
event having a potential for loss of life, injury, or damage to property. 

 PURPOSE 

 
I. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II.  POLICY 
 
 
 
 
 
III.  PROCEDURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

A.  General guidelines for the use of BWC: 

1.  The BWC is intended to supplement reports and investigations and ultimately aid in  
 
 

prosecuting traffic and related offenses, to improve officer performance through training,  
and promote officer safety. 

2.  The BWC is to be used to document events, actions, or statements made during interviews,  
 
  GO 31, Property and Evidence Control and GO 32, Evidence Collection and Preservation. 

arrests, and critical incidents.  All recorded interactions will be kept in accordance with  

3.  The BWC is meant to enhance the Department’s ability to review probable cause for  
 
arrests, searches and seizures, arrest procedures, officer and suspect interaction, and  
evidence for investigative purposes, as well as for officer evaluation and training. 
 

4.  The BWC shall be activated at the initiation of any interaction having the potential to result 
 

in enforcement actions taken by GPD Patrol Officers. 

5.  The BWC shall not be deactivated until the enforcement action is completed or the camera  
 

reaches the end of battery life, whichever comes first. 

6.  Patrol Officers shall not erase or copy any audio and/or video on the BWC, remove the  
  micro SD memory card from the unit or tamper with the unit in any way.  If a copy is  
 
needed by an officer, a request will be made to the Evidence Custodian with incident  
number, date of incident and reason for the copy.  Once approval has been obtained from  
 
 
the Chief of Police, the Evidence Custodian will make the copy for the officer and label it  
  with the appropriate copy number and title. 

 

GO 59.1 of 3 

BODY WORN CAMCORDER 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

7.  Patrol Officers are responsible for maintaining operational readiness of the BWC. 

B.  Use of Force Calls 

 
 
 

It is highly recommended for an officer who files a use of force report, to obtain a copy of the  
footage from the Mini Video Security Camera to a CD, and attach it with the use of force  
report. 

C.  Domestic Calls 

 
 
 

For liability purposes it is highly recommended that officers responding to domestic calls  
record the incident using the Mini Video Security Camera.  A copy of the footage should be  
obtained and become part of that case file. 

D.  Interviews (Opposite Sex) 

 
 
 

 

It is mandatory for an officer who interviews someone of the opposite sex to record the   
interview using the Mini Video Security Camera, with the exceptions of when another officer  
is present, or if the officer is recording the interview in the department’s interview room. 

1.  The interview should be saved to a CD and made part of that case file. 

E.  Prohibitions 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

1.  Any use of the BWC for any purpose other than official law enforcement business is a  
 

violation of this policy. Non-law enforcement business can include, but is not limited to: 

 

 
 

 

 
 

a.  Covertly recording other law enforcement personnel; 

b.  Recording a conversation with a supervisor, council member, or other government  
 

employee; 

c.  Personal use of the BWC; and 

d.  Recording a conversation that the officer is not party to, unless the officer is handling a  
 

law enforcement incident and is in a lawful position when the taping occurs. 

2.  Patrol Officers shall not use the BWC to record a particular person based solely on the  
 
person’s race, color, age, sex, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity, creed,  
religion, ancestry, national origin or physical disability. 
 

3.  Any violation to this policy will result in disciplinary action as outlined in the Town of  
  Gordonsville Employee Manual; verbal reprimand to termination depending on the severity 
 

of the individual offense. 

F.  Data Management 

 
 

1.  BWC recordings shall only be downloaded to computers operated and maintained by the  
  Gordonsville Police Department. 

GO 59.2 of 3 

BODY WORN CAMCORDER 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

responsible for downloading and recycling memory cards of all recordings to a designated  
secure server/computer.  The designated agency system administrator will be contacted by  
the patrol officer to copy any data that is deemed to be of evidentiary value on a media  
storage device (MSD) (i.e. CD-Rom, flash drive, etc.) and entered into evidence. Officers  

2.  Before going off-duty, patrol officers will exchange Micro SD cards with the designee  
 
 
 
 
  will note in incident, arrest and related reports when video/audio recordings were made  
 
during the incident in question. Other data not copied to disc will remain on the secure  
server/computer. 
 

3.  Replacement, Storage and Retrieval of Recordable Media that will be used as Evidence: 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 

a.  An officer that has recorded any activity that they feel may be needed in court as  
 
  media and placement into evidence. 

evidence, shall notify the Evidence Custodian requesting the removal of recordable  

b.  Evidentiary recordable media will then be transferred to the appropriate case file. 

c.  Recordable media containing evidence of a crime or civil litigation will be held until  
 
 

the case is disposed of and all appeals are exhausted, or until released by the courts and  
the Commonwealth Attorney. 

4.  Storage and Retrieval of Recordable Media when its value as evidence is not known: 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

a.  The Evidence Custodian will remove recordable media that have been  
  maximum from the recorder. 

recorded to its  

b.  The recordable media will be stored on the GPD’s secured server.  This is conducted by 
the Evidence Custodian who has the only access to the secured drive.  If during this  
 
time period it is determined that the recordable media may be used as evidence, a copy  
 
  will be copied to a DVD/CD and entered into Evidence and handled as any other type  
 

of evidentiary property. 

5.  Request from the media or other non law enforcement agencies may be charged a fee of  
 
 

$25.00 per event made payable to the Town of Gordonsville.  All such requests are asked  
to be in writing and from persons entitled to view such recordings. 

6.  Digital copies for purposes not associated with the investigation or prosecution of a   
 

violation of law will only be made and or created subject to one of the following: 

 

 

 

a.  Permission from the Chief of Police or his designee; 

b.  Expressed written permission by the Commonwealth Attorney’s Office; 

c.  Required by court order. 

GO 59.3 of 3 

BODY WORN CAMCORDER 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

