TOWN OF WARRENTON

POLICE DEPARTMENT

333 Carriage House Lane • Warrenton, Virginia 20186

Telephone (540) 347-1107 • Fax (540) 341-4190

C..

June 19, 2015

Mr. Frank Knuack
American Civil Liberties Union of Virginia
701-F Franklin Street, Suite 1412
Richmond. VA 23219

Dear Mr. Knaack.

This letter is in response to your Freedom of Information
12. 2015. we are providing the following response to your
requested:

Act (FOIA
request for

request dated June
records in the order

1. General Order 2-42 - Mobile Digital Recorder/Body

Worn Audio-Visual

Carncorders is attached to this letter.
tAll police officers are Lswuecl body cameras

2. N/A
3. General Order 2-42 - Mobile Digital Recorder/Body

Worn Audio-Visual

Carncorders is attached to this letter.

4. N/A
5. N/A
6. N/A
7. N/A

If we can ever be of assistance in the future, please do not hesitate to contact us.

Sincerely.

of Police

,:

t

:,

:;

. **

Warrenton Police Department Accreditation Standards:

Effective Date: May 1 2001

General Order

242

OPR01.11

Supersedes Revision Dated:
July 1, 2008

By Authority of:

Subject:

Mobile Digital RecorderlBody Worn Loui-s’l3ctttIes Chief of Police
Audio-Visual Camcorders

NOTE:

This General Order is for internal use only, and does not enlarge an officers civil or criminal
liability in any way.
It should not be construed as the creation of a higher standard of safety
or care in an evidentiary sense, with respect to third party claims. Violations of this
directive, if proven, can only form the basis of a complaint by this department, and then only
in a non-judicial administrative setting

POLICY:
Mobile Digital Recording (MDR) equipment and Body Worn Audio-Visual Camcorders
(BWC) have proven to be a valuable law enforcement tool
in the prosecution of traffic
violations and related criminal offenses, for evaluation of officer tactics and performance,
and for training purposes.
In order to maximize the utility and benefit of this specialized
the Department has established certain guidelines for its use. MDR/BWC
equipment,
equipment shall be used only for legitimate law enforcement purposes in accordance with
applicable law and Departmental guidelines.

PURPOSE:
The purpose of this General Order is to establish Department guidelines for the use of
MDR/BWC recording equipment installed in police vehicles and issued to police personnel.

III.

DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions are for the limited purpose of this General Order and may not
apply in all other cases:

A. MDR: an acronym for Mobile Digital Recorder; this term refers to audio/video/digital

recording equipment designed for fixed installation in patrol vehicles.

B. BWC: an acronym for Body Worn Audio-Visual Camcorder, designed for wear on the

officer’s uniform.

C. MDR/BWC Operator:

shall mean an officer who is authorized to utilize such

equipment for enforcement and documentation purposes.

2—42.1

Revised 0411112012

IV.
A.

PROCEDURES:
Program Objectives
1.

The Warrenton Police Department has approved the use of MDRs and BWCs to
accomplish legitimate police objectives, including but not limited to:
a. Accurate documentation of events, actions, conditions and statements made
during investigative stops, field interviews, arrests and critical incidents, so as to
enhance officer reports, collection of evidence, and courtroom testimony.
Reviewing probable cause for arrest, custody procedures, officer and suspect
interaction, and evidence for investigative purposes.
Evaluation of officer tactics and field performance, and for training purposes.

b.

c.

B. Operating Procedures

1.

2.

3.

The care and security of MDR equipment is the responsibility of the officer assigned to
that vehicle, and will be maintained and operated according to manufacturer’s
recommendations. BWC equipment will be issued to each officer and will also be
maintained and operated according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Prior to beginning a tour of duty, the officer shall determine if the MDR equipment
installed in their assigned vehicle is working properly, and shall promptly notify their
supervisor of any malfunction or problem. Officers should also ensure they have an
adequate supply of videotape/disk time to complete their
tour of duty. Only
videotapes/disks issued and approved for use by the Department may be utilized in
agency MDR equipment.
(Officers will switch to a spare vehicle if their MDR is not
working)
The MDR equipment utilized by the Department is normally installed and designed to
activate automatically when the patrol car’s emergency lights are in operation. The
officer from outside the vehicle can also remotely activate MDR equipment by using
the remote audio receiver and wireless microphone transmitter.

4. MDR equipment may be manually deactivated during non-enforcement activities such

5.

6.

7.

8.

is fully charged prior to the shift and is

as when protecting accident scenes from other vehicular traffic.
Officers will ensure that BWC equipment
uploaded into the appropriate file on the p-drive at the end of every shift.
Officers are required to use their MDR equipment
to record the actions and
speech of suspects during field interviews, vehicle stops, field sobriety testing, arrests
and investigative detention, field searches and domestic disturbance calls, as well as
to record crime and accident scenes, or other events such as the confiscation and
documentation of evidence or contraband. The presumption is that all of the above
incidents should be recorded, unless it is not possible (OPR.O1.lla).
BWC equipment are to be used to record interactions with citizens that fall outside the
parameters given for MDR use, during encounters that may become controversial,
adversarial or confrontational and the MDR is not activated or effective (OPR.O1.lla).
Officers should observe the following general procedures to ensure that the MVR/MDR
equipment will properly record traffic stops or other enforcement actions undertaken in
the field;

2—42.2

Revised 04111/2012

a. Make sure that the video/digital camera is properly positioned and adjusted at the

b.

c.

correct viewing angle to visually record the events.
The MDR will not be deactivated until the vehicle stop or other enforcement
action is completed.
The wire$ess microphone must a’ways be turned on in order to provide audio
recording as well as video recording during MDR activation.

9. MDR/BWC Operators shall not have the authority to erase, reuse or in any manner
alter videotapes or disks or BWC files.
All completed videotapes/disks shall be
properly labeled and identified by the Property Evidence Officer (PEC) prior to being
placed into storage. All video footage generated by BWC equipment will be uploaded
daily onto the p-drive in the officer’s designated folder. Hard drives from MDR
equipment will be given to the PEO who will upload the files to the designated storage
areas.

10. Any use of

the MDRIBWC for any purpose other than official

law enforcement

business is a violation of this policy.
a.

b.

c.

d.

e.
f.

Only audio/video recording devices issued by the Department are authorized for
use by Departmental personnel.
Personally owned audio/video recording devices are not authorized for use by
Departmental personnel, while on duty.
Audio/video recording conducted by Departmental personnel
business only.
Except as directed by the Chief of Police, no member of the Department shall
make an audio/video recording of any conversation or interaction with another
member of the Department without that person’s prior consent and knowledge.
This consent shall be recorded at the beginning of the recording.
The person conducting the taping shall, upon request, make the recording
available to all other participants of the conversation for the purpose of making a
copy.

for official

is

11. MDR Operators are encouraged to inform their supervisor of any video/digital

sequences that may be of value for training purposes.

12. MDR/BWC Operators should officially note in all

incidents, arrests and any other
related reports when video/digital/audio recordings have been made with MDR/BWC
equipment, and may be needed in court.

13. MDR Operators must ensure the MDR equipment is turned off at the end of their shift

or when out of the unit for more than one (1) hour.

C. Media Control and Management (OPR.O1.llb):

2-42.3

Revised 04/1112012

Officers are responsible for having sufficient recording space available on the media
required for their recording devices.
If a cruiser has a lockable vault, the officer will be
issued a key for the vault that contains the video recording device. When a videotape
or CD is fully recorded,
it should be turned in to the PEO who will provide a clean
videotape or disk in exchange for each used one. Each videotape or disk must be
labeled with the officer’s name, cruiser number and the dates that the media went into
and out of service. When an MDR hard drive is filled, it will be temporarily labeled with
the vehicle number and officer’s name and will be turned over to the PEO for
uploading into digital storage.

2. MDR videotapes/disks, and digital footage generated by MDRs or BWCs shall not be
released to any outside agency or individual, or duplicated for such dissemination,
without the prior consent of the Chief of Police or Deputy Chief, or pursuant to a valid
court order.
Digital footage generated by MDRs and BWCs not held for evidentiary purposes shall
be maintained by the PEO in accordance with the standards set forth by the Library of
Virginia (OPR.O1.llc). All stored videotapes/disks sha’l be labeled in a manner that
allows efficient identification and retrieval.

3.

D.

Security and Storage

The integrity of videotapes and disks is the responsibility of the officer who produces
them. When a videotape, disk, or hard drive is fully recorded,
it will be given to the
PEO for storage, but not listed as evidence. The PED must be notified as to whether
the media will be needed for court testimony or departmental processes.
If an officer should want a portion of a videotape or disk reproduced for evidence, the
officer should immediately record the vehicle number, time and date of the incident
and forward this request through their supervisor to the Deputy Chief.

2.

E.

Supervisory Responsibilities

all officers

for

the use and

follow established procedures

Supervisory personnel who manage officers who operate MDR/BWC equipment are
responsible for the following:
a.

Ensuring that
maintenance of MDR/BWC equipment.
Conducting a periodic review of MDR videotapes/disks to assess officer
performance, determine whether MDR equipment
is being fully and properly
used, and to identify material that may be of value for training purposes.
Ensuring that repairs of damaged and replacement of nonfunctional MDR/BWC
equipment is properly performed.
Ensuring the completion of all statistical reports needed for MDR/BWC program
evaluation.

b.

c.

d.

Only audio/video recording devices issued by the Department are authorized for use

by Departmental personnel.

2—42.4

Revised D4/11/2012

Personally owned audio/video recording devices are not authorized for use by

Departmental personnel! while on duty.

Audio/video recording by Departmental personnel will be for official business only.
Except as directed by the Chief of Police, no member of the Department shall make an
audio/video recording or any conversation or interaction with another member of
the Department without that person’s prior consent and knowledge. This consent
shall be recording at the beginning of the recording. The person conducting the
taping shall, upon request, make the recording available to all other participants
in the conversation for the purpose of making a copy.

2-42.5

Revised 04111/2012

