HARms, 1W&rnins & CRoWDER, P. C.

LAW OFFICES OF

Bracey Office

E. Warren Matthews
9718 Highway 903

P 0. Box 369

Bracey, Virginia 23919

Telephone (134) 6366363

Fax: (434) 636-5644

South Hill Office

Frank P. harris i1924-1005

Charles 11 Crowder. Ill
Harry S Montgomery, III

Teethe Barnes Bacon

1’

(1 Box 369

South Hill, Virginia 23970
Telephone: (434) 137.:)) 2H

Fax: (331) 447-2735

June 29, 2015

American Civil Liberties Union of Virginia
ATTN: Frank Knaack, Director
Public Policy and Communication
701 E. Franklin Street, Suite 1412
Richmond, Virginia 23219

Re: FOIA Request for Body Camera Equipment and Policy

Dear Mr. Knaack:

Kenbridge Office
Calvin 5. Spencer. Jr.
111 EnaL Fifth Avenue

P. 0 DrawerG

Kenliridge. Virginin 2394-I
Telephnne: (331) 676.2403
(133) 292.1386

Fax: (434)676-2192

r :nr ç•
4_t._;__ t’ L. -.
(f1 0 2 20i5

Pursuant to your Freedom of Information Act request of June 12, 2015, please find
I

enclosed the Kenbridge Police Department’s policy regarding Body Worn Cameras.
believe this policy is responsive to your request.

The Kenbddge Police Department has a DVD for training purposes. The DVD would

be copyright protected. If you would like to view the DVD, then you may contact the
Kenbridge Police Chief, Raymond Hite, directly.

Thank you for your attention to this matter.

Sincerely,

r.

CS Sjr/lj

Enclosure

cc: Raymond Hite, Chief of Police

Kenbridge P.D.

£ fLt(1

Effective Date
Junel2OlS
Number
Subject-Body-Worn Cameras
Reference Special Instructions
Distribution Reevaluation Date November 2015 No. Pages 3
I. PURPOSE
This policy is intended to provide officers with instructions
on when and how to use body-worn cameras (BWCs) 50
that officers may reliably record their contacts with the
public in accordance with the law.i
II. POLICY
It is the policy of Kenbridge Police Dept. that officers shall
activate the BWC when such use is appropriate to the
proper performance of his or her official duties, where
the recordings are consistent with this policy and law.
This policy does not govern the use of surreptitious
recording devices used in undercover operations.
III. PROCEDURES
A. Administration
This agency has adopted the use of the BWC
to accomplish several objectives. The primary
objectives are as follows:
1. BWCs allow for accurate documentation of police-
public contacts, arrests, and critical incidents.
They also serve to enhance the accuracy
of officer reports and testimony in court.
2. Audio and video recordings also enhance this
agency’s ability to review probable cause for
arrest, officer and suspect interaction, and evidence
for investigative and prosecutorial purposes
and to provide additional information for
officer evaluation and training.
3. The BWC may also be useful in documenting
crime and accident scenes or other events that
include the confiscation and documentation of
evidence or contraband.

B. When and How to Use the BWC
1. Officers shall activate the BWC to record all
contacts with citizens in the performance of
official duties.
2. Whenever possible, officers should inform individuals
that they are being recorded. In locations
where individuals have a reasonable expectation
of privacy, such as a residence, they
may decline to be recorded unless the recording
is being made in pursuant to an arrest or
search of the residence or the individuals. The
BWC shall remain activated until the event is
completed in order to ensure the integrity of
the recording unless the contact moves into an
area restricted by this policy (see items 0.1-4).
3. If an officer fails to activate the BWC, fails to
record the entire contact, or interrupts the recording,
the officer shalt document why a recording
was not made, was interrupted, or was
terminated.
4. Civilians shall not be allowed to review the recordings
at the scene.
C. Procedures for BWC Use
1. BWC equipment is issued primarily to uniformed
personnel as authorized by this agency.
Offlcer5 who are assigned BWC equipment
must use the equipment unless otherwise authorized
by supervisory personnel.
2. Police personnel shall use only BWCs issued by
this department. The BWC equipment and all
data, images, video, and metadata captured,
recorded, or otherwise produced by the equipment
is the sole property of the agency.
3. Police personnel will be instructed on proper use of BWC.
Additional training may be required
at periodic intervals to ensure the continued
effective use and operation of the equipment,
proper calibration and performance, and to incorporate
changes, updates, or other revisions
in policy and equipment.
4. BWC equipment is the responsibility of individual
officers and will be used with reasonablecare
to ensure proper functioning. Equipment
malfunctions shall be brought to the attention
of the officer’s supervisor as soon as possible
so that a replacement unit may be procured.
5. Officers shall inspect and test the BWC prior to

each shift in order to verify proper functioning
and shall notify their supervisor of any problems.
6. Officers shall not edit, alter, erase, duplicate,
copy, share, or otherwise distribute in any
manner BWC recordings without prior written
authorization and approval of the chief executive
officer (CEO) or his or her designee.
7. Officers are encouraged to inform their supervisor
of any recordings that maybe of value for
training purposes.
8. If an officer is suspected of wrongdoing or involved
in an officer-involved shooting or other
serious use of force, the department reserves
the right to limit or restrict an officer from
viewing the video file.
9. Requests for deletion of portions of the recordings
(e.g., in the event of a personal recording)
must be submitted in writing and approved by
the chief executive officer or his or her designee
in accordance with state record retention
laws. All requests and final decisions shall be
kept on file.
10. Officers shall note in incident, arrest, and
related reports when recordings were made
during the incident in question. However, BWC
recordings are not a replacement for written
reports.
D. Restrictions on Using the BWC
BWCs shall be used only in conjunction with
official law enforcement duties. The BWC shall not
generally be used to record:
1. Communications with other police personnel
without the permission of the chief executive
officer (CEO);
2. Encounters with undercover officers or confidential
informants;
3. When on break or otherwise engaged in personal
activities; or
4. In any location where individuals have a reasonable
expectation of privacy, such as a restroom
or locker room.
E. Storage
1. All filesshall be securely downloaded periodically
and no later than the end of once a month.
Each file shall contain information related to
the date, BWC identifier, and assigned officer.
2. All images and sounds recorded by the BWC are

the exclusive property of Kenbridge Police Dept. Accessing,
copying, or releasing files for non law
enforcement purposes is strictly prohibited.
3. All access to BWC files must be specifically authorized
by the CEO or his or her designee, and
all access is to be audited to ensure that only
authorized users are accessing the data for legitimate
and authorized purposes.
4. Files should be securely stored in accordance
with state records retention laws and no longer
than useful for purposes of training or for
use in an investigation or prosecution. In capital
punishment prosecutions, recordings shall
be kept until the offender is no longer under
control of a criminal justice agency.
F. Supervisory Responsibilities
2. Supervisory personnel shall ensure that officers
equipped with BWC devices utilize them in accordance
with policy and procedures defined
herein.
2. At least on a monthly basis, supervisors will
randomly review BWC recordings to ensure
that the equipment is operating properly and
that officers are using the devices appropriately
and in accordance with policy and to identify
any areas in which additional training or guidance
is required.

