has made them practical in limited situations. However it must be kept in mind 
that these devices are not secure and the images captured may be sensitive in 
nature. Any  photos that will be submitted to the Commonwealth Attorney's 
office as evidence or the State Laboratory for  forensic analysis shall be taken 
with the department issued 35mm camera and handled as stated previously in 
this section. Only department issued cell phones, tablets and cameras, digital or 
film, may be used. 

VIII. Required paperwork 

A.  Access log (evidence custodian use only) 

B.  Request for  Destruction order 

C.  Authorization of release 

D.  Property Record For/Property Release form (submitted with every case by 

officer) 

E.  Right of Refusal 

F.  Currency record 

Villi. Body Worn Audio/Visual Record-Capture Digital Camcorders 

This is to establish policy and guidelines for  electronic data collection resulting from the use 
of body worn audio/visual camcorders  (BWC). It also serves to direct officers and supervisors in 
the proper use and maintenance  of the BWC.  The pmpose of the BWC  is to provide an accurate 
unbiased audio/visual record of enforcement related and non-criminal incidents that will enhance 
criminal prosecutions  and limit civil liabilities. 

It will be the policy of the New  Market Police Department that officers shall use the issued 
BWC when interviewing suspects of crimes, field sobriety tests (in  conjunction with the in-car 
video camera), establishing probable cause for pedestrian  stops and detentions, or any situation, 
condition, or event having a potential for  loss of life, injury or damage to property. 

Procedure 

A.  General guidelines for the use  of  BWC 

1. The BWC  is intended to supplement reports and investigations and ultimately aid in 

prosecuting traffic criminal and related offenses, to improve officer performance 
through training, and promote officer safety. 

2-15.19 

2. The BWC  is to be used to document events, actions, or statements made during arrests, 

interviews, and critical incidents in order to enhance report preparation and 
investigations, 

3.  The BWC  is meant to enhance the Department's  ability to review probable cause for 
arrests, searches and seizures, attest procedures, officer and suspect interaction, and 
evidence for  investigative puiposes, as well as for officer evaluation and training, 

B.  The BWC  shall not be deactivated  until the enforcement action is completed. 

C.  Officers shall not erase any audio and or video on the  BWC. 

Prohibitions 

A.  Any  use  of the BWC  for  any purpose other than official law enforcement business is a 

violation of this policy. Non-law enforcement business can include, but is not limited to: 

1. Covertly recording other law enforcement  personnel; 

2. Recording a conversation with a supervisor,  council member,  or other  government 

employee; 

3. Personal use of the BWC;  and 

4.  Recording a conversation that the officer is not party to,  unless the officer is 

handling a law enforcement incident and is in a lawful position when the taping 
occurs. 

B.  Officers shall not use the BWC  to record a particular person based solely on the person's 

race, color, age, sex marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity, creed religion, 
ancestry, national origin or physical disability. 

I 

( 

Data  Management 

A.  BWC  recordings shall only be downloaded to computers operated and maintained by the 

New Market Police  Department. 

B.  If there are any recording that is deemed to be of evidentiaiy value the officer will notify 

the Chief of Police that a copy needs to be made on a media storage device (i.e.  CD-ROM, 
flash drive, etc.)and entered into evidence.  Officers will note in incident, arrest and related 

2-15.20 

reports when video/audio recordings were made during the incident in  question. Other 
data not copied to disc will remain on a secure computer for  90 days at which time it shall 
be erased. 

C.  Only a copy of the data will be released to another criminal justice agency for  trial or other 

Reasons. The original data will remain in safe storage. 

D.  Data will not be released to any outside non-criminal justice entity, regards of the content, 

without explicit authority from the Chief of Police or his designee, 

E.  The media storage device shall be retained for  3 years or until the case is resolved or 

evidence is released, whichever is longer, and then the media device or its contents shall 
be destroyed. 

F.  Digital copies for purposes not associated with the investigation or prosecution of  a 

violation of  law  will only be made or created subject to  one of the following: 

1. Permission from the Chief of Police or his designee; or 

2. Required by court order. 

2-15.21 

