                                                     Berryville Police Department     Page 1 

                                                                   General Order # 34– Body Worn Camera 

GENERAL ORDER 

  NUMBER : # 34 
  SUBJECT : Body Worn Camera 

EFFECTIVE DATE: 01/08/2013 
REVIEW DATE: 03/02/2015 
REVISED DATE: 03/12/2015 
Amends/Supersedes all previous orders 
related to body worn cameras 
APPROVED BY CHIEF: 01/08/2013 

 

 

 

CHIEF OF POLICE : 

W. Neal White 

NOTE: This order is for internal use only, and does not enlarge an officer’s civil or 
criminal liability in any way.  It should be construed as the creation of a higher standard 
of safety or care in an evidentiary sense, with respect to third-party claims.  Violations of 
this order, if proven, can only form the basis of a complaint by this department, and then 
only in a non-judicial administrative setting. 
 

I.  POLICY 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Officers of the Berryville Police Department will use the issued body worn 
audio/visual camcorders (BWC) during law enforcement-related encounters and 
activities that occur while on duty.  Examples of these types of activities include 
interviewing suspects of crimes, conducting field sobriety tests, performing traffic 
stops, establishing probable cause for pedestrian stops and detentions, arrests, 
conducting searches, citizen contacts that turn adversarial, or any situation, 
condition, or event having a potential for loss of life, injury, or damage to 
property. 

II.  PURPOSE 
 

The purpose of this policy is to establish guidelines for electronic data collection 
resulting from the use of a BWC.  It also serves to direct officers and supervisors 
in the proper use and maintenance of the BWC.  The purpose of the BWC is to 
provide an accurate unbiased audio/visual record of enforcement related and non-
criminal incidents that will enhance criminal prosecutions and limit civil 
liabilities. 

COMMITMENT – SERVICE – INTEGRITY - EXCELLENCE 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                     Berryville Police Department     Page 2 

                                                                   General Order # 34– Body Worn Camera 

III. PROCEDURE 

1.  General Guidelines for the Use of BWC 

A.  The BWC is intended to supplement reports and investigations and ultimately 

aid in prosecuting traffic and criminal offenses, to improve officer 
performance through training, and promote officer safety. 

B.  The BWC is to be used to document events, actions, or statements made 

during arrests, interviews, and critical incidents in order to enhance report 
preparation and investigation. 

C.  The BWC is meant to enhance the Department’s ability to review probable 

cause for arrests, searches and seizures, arrest procedures, officer and suspect 
interaction, and evidence for investigative purposes, as well as for officer 
evaluation and training. 
 

2.  Prior to deployment in the field, all officers will be trained on the proper use, care, 

maintenance, and procedures governing the use of the issued BWC. 

3.  The BWC shall not be deactivated until the enforcement action is completed. 

4.  Officers shall not erase or alter any audio and/or video on the BWC. 

 

 

5.  Any malfunctions, damage, or loss of a BWC shall immediately be reported to a 

supervisor or the Chief of Police in writing. 
 

6.  The issued BWC shall be worn on the uniform in the chest area. 

7.  When the BWC is used to record an event, encounter, or interview that culminates 

in the filing of an official police report or IBR, the officer shall denote in the 
narrative of the report that there is a BWC recording available. 

IV. PROHIBITIONS 

 

1.  Any use of the BWC for any purpose other than official law enforcement business 
is a violation of this policy.  Non-law enforcement business can include, but is not 
limited to: 
A.  Covertly recording other law enforcement personnel; 
B.  Recording a conversation with a supervisor, council member, or other 

government employee; 

C.  Personal use of the BWC;  
D.  Recording a conversation that the officer is not party to, unless the officer is 

handling a law enforcement incident and is in a lawful position when the 
taping occurs; and 

E.  Accessing recorded data for personal use and uploading onto public and social 

media websites. 
 

COMMITMENT – SERVICE – INTEGRITY - EXCELLENCE 

                                                     Berryville Police Department     Page 3 

                                                                   General Order # 34– Body Worn Camera 
2.  Officers shall not use the BWC to record a particular person based solely on the 
person’s race, color, age, sex, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity, 
creed religion, ancestry, national origin or physical disability. 

 
3.  Officers shall only use department issued recording equipment while on duty, no 

personally owned equipment will be substituted for department recording 
equipment. 
 

V.  DATA MANAGEMENT 

 

1.  BWC recordings shall only be downloaded using computers operated and 

maintained by the Berryville Police Department 
 

2.  Before going off-duty, officers will download all recordings to a designated 
secure server/computer.  When any recordings deemed to be of evidentiary 
value are transferred to the department server/computer, the officer shall copy 
the data on a media storage device (i.e. CD-Rom, flash drive, etc.) and enter a 
copy into evidence.  Other data not copied to a media storage device will 
remain on the secure server/computer for ninety (90) days at which time it shall 
be erased. 
 

3.  Data will not be released to another criminal justice agency for trial or other 

reasons without having a duplicate copy made and returned to safe storage; and 

 
4.  Data will not be released to any outside non-criminal justice entity, regardless 

of the content, without explicit authority from the Chief of Police or their 
designee. 

 
5.  Media storage devices containing data files deemed of evidentiary value shall 

be retained for three (3) years or until the case is resolved or evidence is 
released, whichever is longer, and then the media storage device or its contents 
shall be destroyed. 

 
6.  Digital copies for purposes not associated with the investigation or prosecution 

of a violation of law will only be made or created subject to one of the 
following: 
A.  Permission from the Chief of Police or his designee; or 
B.  Required by court order. 

COMMITMENT – SERVICE – INTEGRITY - EXCELLENCE 

                                                     Berryville Police Department     Page 4 

                                                                   General Order # 34– Body Worn Camera 
VI. SUPERVISOR RESPONSIBILITIES 

 

1.  Department supervisors shall ensure that officers under their command are 

trained in the appropriate use of the BWC as well as data management 
software associated with the BWC. 
 

2.  Supervisor will perform inspections of officers under their command to ensure 

that they are wearing issued body worn cameras. 

 
3.  Supervisors can review recordings to investigate complaints against an officer, 

to identify videos for training and instructional purposes, and in performance 
of random audits.  Supervisors shall not use recordings as a mechanism to 
initiate disciplinary action without the establishment of a justification for 
investigation such as a citizen complaint.  Intentional trolling of recordings in 
search of officer policy violations is counterproductive to the BWC program 
and creates an environment of distrust among supervisors and their 
subordinates. 

 
4.  In instances of officer involved shootings, in custody deaths, or other cases of 

bodily harm and death; a supervisor shall take custody of the involved 
officer’s BWC and establish an immediate chain of custody by downloading 
the recording.  The supervisor shall document their handling of the recording 
and ensure that no tampering occurs with the recording. 
 

COMMITMENT – SERVICE – INTEGRITY - EXCELLENCE 

