DraIès
J3ranch

Town of Drakes Branch
P.O. BOX 191 - DRAKES BRANCH, VA 23937

Phone -(133) 568-3091 e-mail: drakesbr’hovac.cam

4Veb-sjte: www.towndrakesbranch.com

MAYOR

Denise L. Pridgen

CLERK-TREASURER

Mary Sands

VICE-MAYOR

Clarence Hamlen Jr.

June 23, 2015

Frank Knaack
ACLU of Virginia
701 E. Franklin Street. Suite 1412
Richmond. Virginia 23219

RE: FOIA Request! Body Camera Equipment and Policy

Dear Mr. Knaack:

As referenced above, the town is enclosing our policy information that you requested. The town
has I part-time police officer and I Veho Muvi camera with an 8 gb micro sd card.

Should you have any questions, please let the town know.

Sincerely,

Maiy Sand
Town Clerk

/mS

Enclosure

Non-Discrimination Statement

This institution is an equal opportunity provider and employer.” If you uish to file a Civil Rights proQram complaint of
discrimination, complete the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint Form, found online at
httpd/www.ascr.usda.gov/complaint fihinu cust.html. or at any USDA oflice. or call (866) 632-9992 to request the form, You
may also write a letter containing all oldie information requested in the form. Send your completed complaint form or letter to
us by mail at U.S. Department of Agriculture, Director. 0115cc of Adjudication. 1400 Independence ,\Venue, SW.. Washington.
D.C. 20250-9410. by th (202) 690-7442 or email at proeram.intakeusda.Eov.”

Subject: Audio/Visual Record-capture Digital Camcorders

Effective Date: November 1, 2011

Supersedes/Amends: N.A.

Approved By: Mayor Pridgen and Vice-Mayor Hamlett Jr.

Purpose

To establish policy and guideline5 for electronic data collection resulting from the use of body worn
audio/visual camcorders (BWC). It also serves to direct officers and supervisors in the proper use and
maintenance of the BWC. The purpose of the BWC is to provide an accurate unbiased audio/visual
record of enforcement related and non-criminal incidents that will enhance criminal prosecutions and
limit civil liabilities.

Policy

Officer(s) of the Town of Drakes Branch Police Department shall use the issued BWC when interviewing
suspects of crimes, field sobriety tests, traffic stops, establishing probable cause for pedestrian stops
and detentions, or any situation, condition, or event having a potential for loss of life, injury, or damage
to property.

Procedure

I.

General guidelines for the use of BWC:

a. The BWC is intended to supplement reports and investigations and ultimately aid in

prosecuting traffic and related offenses, to improve officer performance through
training, and promote officer safety.

b. The BWC is to be used to document events, actions, or statements made during arrests,

interviews, and critical incidents in order to enhance report preparation and
investigation.

c. The BWC is meant to enhance the Department’s ability to review probable cause for
arrests, searches and seizures, arrest procedures, officer and suspect interaction, and
evidence for investigative purposes, as well as for officer evaluation and training.

II.
Ill.

The BWC shall not be deactivated until the enforcement action is completed.
Officer(s) shall not erase any audio and/or video on the BWC.

2

:7
7

<

Prohibitions

I.

Any use of the BWC for any purpose other than official law enforcement business is a violation
of this policy. Non-law enforcement business can include, but is not limited to:

a. Covertly recording other law enforcement personnel;
b. Recording a conversation with a supervisor, council member, or other government

employee;
Personal use of the BWC; and

c.
d. Recording a conversation that the officer is not party to, unless the officer is handling a

law enforcement incident and is in a lawful position when the taping occurs.

II.

Officers shall not use the BWC to record a particular person based solely on the person’s race,
color, age, sex, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity, creed religion, ancestry,
national origin or physical disability.

Data Management

I.

II.

Ill.

IV.

V.

VI,

BWC recordings shall only be downloaded to computers operated and maintained by the Town
of Drakes Branch.
Before going off-duty, officers will download all recordings to a designated secure
server/computer. The designated agency system administrator will be contacted by the officer
to copy any data that is deemed to be of evidentiary value on a media storage device (i.e. CD
Rom, flash drive, etc.) and entered into evidence. Officers will note in incident, arrest and
related reports when video/audio recordings were made during the incident in question. Other
data not copied to disc will remain on the secure server/computer for 90 days at which time it
shall be erased.
Data will not be released to another criminal justice agency for trial or other reasons without
having a duplicate copy made and returned to safe storage; and
Data will not be released to any outside non-criminal justice entity, regardless of the content,
without explicit authority from the Chief of Police or their designee.
The media storage device shall be retained for 3 years or until the case is resolved or evidence is
released, whichever is longer, and then the media storage device or its contents shall be
destroyed.
Digital copies for purposes not associated with the investigation or prosecution of a violation of
law will only be made and or created subject to one of the following:

a. Permission from the Chief of Police or his designee; or
b. Required by court order.

