‘

$b1fFFX

1’0o.Flct

,SDOAH c0

Ott

p

Sheriff Timothy C. Caner

SHENANDOAH COUNTY SHERIFF’S OFFICE

109 West Court Street . Woodstock, Virginia 22664

(540) 459-6100 FAX (540) 459-6114 Email: shehtf@shencosheriff.com

www.shencosheriff.com

23 June 20 I 5

Jason Miller
ACLU of Virginia
701 E. Franklin Street. Suite 1412
Richmond, VA 23219

Re:

rOtA Body Camera Equipment and Policy

Dear Mr. Miller.

I am in receipt of your request for records regarding Ia\\ enforcement worn body cameras. As you

may be aware, requests For records oF and inlbrmation in the possession of the Commonwealth. its
agencies and poliiical subdivisions is governed by the Virginia Freedom of Information Act (FOIA),
§2.2-3700 et seq. of the Cot/c of Virginict.

Records Requested:

#1 - The Shenandoah County Sheriff’s 0111cc (SCSO) has thirty three (33) body cameras

ctirreiitly in service.

— SCSO Officers collect criminal incident information/data with body cameras.

#1, #2, #3, #4, #7- Enclosed is the SCSO Policy regarding body worn cameras and their

usc/training.

#5- All dissemination regarding data/recordinas are dependent upon rules, laws, and policies

pertaining to evidence and criminal incident information (sce also SCSO Policy).

#6- Not Applicable.

If you have any further questions regarding this mailer, please let ne know.

Sincerely,

Timothy C. Carter
Sheriff

Enclosure

An Accredited LAth’ Enfr;rcenie,ri Agency Since 2006

‘t %*tA’FP

Sheriff Timothy C. Carter

SHENANDOAH COUNTY SHERIFF’S OFFICE

109 West Court Street Woodstock, Virginia 22664

(540) 459-6100

FAX (540) 459-6114 Email: sheritf@shencosherifl.com

www.shencosheriff.com

Note:

Camera systems used in the field record criminal activity and have therefore proven to be a valuable
evidentiary tool that enhances public safety. These systems also provide a cenath level of protection for
both citizens and Shenandoah County Sheriffs Office (SCSO) personnel by offering a very effective
method to capture and document the conduct.. training, and activities of agency personnel while in the
performance of their duties.

I.

Purpose:

The purpose of this directive is to establish guidelines for the proper utilization of field camera systems.

U.

Policy:

It is the policy of the SCSO to use field camera systems as directed to ensure that activities are recorded
appropriately and the associated recorded data is properly controlled.

Ill.

Procedures — General:

Note:

Field cameras systems for the purposes of this directive are defined as portable or mobile
electronic recording equipment deployed in such a manner to capture law enforcement activity in
the field that is to be stored in an agency server.

A.

These systems include the following:

1.
2.

Body Cameras
In-Car Cameras

B.

C.

D.

E.

Field camera systems will be issued to authorized personnel based on their assigned duties.

Personnel outfitted with such equipment either on their person or mounted in their assigned
vehicle will be trained by supervision or other authorized personnel. The training shall include
proper use of equipment and a thorough understanding of this directive.

Personnel will inspect and test the equipment on a routine basis (daily) and immediately forward
any deficiencies through the chain of command. Personnel shall also comply with any
manufacture’s recommendations as it relates to proper utilization, care and maintenance of the
equipment.

Equipment shall be worn andtor kept on (powered) at all times while in the performance of one’s
normal duties.

An .4(Crc(hyed f_(III Lu/ui cCitt,’)?!

.1 t’t’iiii Sit hi’ 2006

F.

G.

Equipment shall not be altered or modified from its original condition excluding updates to normal
settings (date/time) and adjusmients to the aiming or placement of camera(s).

Unless out of service, the equipment should be utilized (activated) for the following activities:

Note:

Although some systems may activate automatically, it is still the operator’s responsibility
to ensure that the equipment is recording the required activities.

1.

Traffic Stops

a.

b.

All taffic stops shall be recorded.

The operator shall activate the system as soon as possible when observing
probable cause or a traffic violation. Then continue recording the entire stop.
concluding as the violator drives away.

2.

Suspected DCI Stops

a.

b.

c.

The operator shall activate the system at the point when they first suspect a
violation,

If field sobriety tests are administered and safety permits, the visual performance
of such tests shall be included. Regardless, the audio shall remain on.

If arrested, the recording shall conclude when the subject is removed from the
patrol vehicle at thejai].

3.

Motor Vehicle Searches

a.

b.

All vehicle searches should be recorded.

The operator shall activate the system as soon as possible and continue
recording the entire search until conclusion of the incident.

4.

Motor Vehicle Crashes

a.

b.

At the discretion of the deputy, a crash scene can be recorded if it will assist in
the investigation and/or adjudication of the case, or there are special
circumstances that warrant the recording.

The operator can conclude recording at their discretion.

5.

Other Calls for Service

a.

b.

The operator should record siniazions or incidents where the use of such
recordings (audio or video) will aid in the documentation of the actions of
involved parties.

The operator can stop recording upon the conclusion of the incident or upon
arrival at the jail, if an arrest occurs.

6.

Transports

a.

b.

At theft discretion, the operator can record the transport ofan adult orjuvenile
detainee, arrestee, or prisoner.

Recording shall conclude when the subject is removed from the patrol vehicle at
the destination.

IV.

Procedures - Data Control and Access:

Note:

The recorded data identified in this directive is the exclusive property of the SCSO. Any release or
dissemination of any portion of a recording (either audio or video), excluding the authorized
release of recorded data for court proceedings, is strictly prohibited without the expressed consent
of the Sheriff.

A.

Access to any recording unit and’or installed hard drive shall be controlled.

The unit shall be in a secure box in each vehicle and the keys to those boxes maintained
by authorized supervisors and the Patrol Division Chief.

2.

Only an authorized supervisor is allowed to physically remove the installed hard drive
from the recording unit. In such cases the supervisor is also responsible for ensuring that
the hard drive is immediately entered into property and evidence as outlined below and
for replacing the removed hard drive as soon as possible.

B.

Recorded data is also considered a control item and will be accounted for through the agency’s
property and evidence control procedures as follows:

Note:

Additional procedures related to property and evidence are further outlined in SOP 4-18;
Property and Evidence Control.

I.

2.

3.

4.

5.

Only authorized personnel shall have access to recorded data to include the data stored in
the propem’/evidence room’s records management system. The system shall also be kept
secure and password protected in accordance with SOP 4-8-C; Computer Technology.

Any removed hard drives that contain data will be treated as evidence and accompanied
by the proper documentation shall be placed into temporary storage or named directly
over to a property officer who will enter and/or download the data into the records
management system as soon as possible.

Data that is automatically downloaded wirelessly or by other means into the system will
also be treated as evidence and handled appropriately.

Data downloaded into the records management system can also be retrieved through the
property and evidence control procedures in accordance with established procedures.

All recorded data downloaded into the system will be retained for at least 30-days
consistent with the Code of Virginia as outlined in SOP 1-14-A; Records Retention,
unless flagedTheld for evidentiarv or other internal purposes.

V.

Procedures — Random Rcviews:

A.

B.

The Patrol Division Chief will ensure that supervisors are periodically conducting random reviews
of recorded files to ensure that personnel are adhering to agency procedures.

Supervisors shall take corrective measures for any noted deficiencies. This action shall be
documented and forwarded through normal channels.

3

