1100 Cedar Valley Drive. Suite 2
Post Office Box 33
Cedar Bluff, Virginia 24609
Voice. (888) 374-5078
Fax: (276) 206-2255
ww\•: r.Rlhfflaw nt

June 22, 2015

TH

FIRM

A P rote ,Jone I Corpo riIo,

Bradley C. Ratliff, Attorney at Law
Natasha L. Ratliff, Paralegal

Mr. Fred Knaack
Director. Public Policy and Communications
AC L U
701 E. Franklin Street. Suite 1412
Richmond, VA 23219

RE:

FOIA Response

Dear Mr. Knaack:

Please be advised that this office represents the Town of Richiands. Virginia.

We are in

receipt of your FOIA Request dated June 12. 2015.

You request numerous policies concerning body camera use by the town police force.
Attached herewith, please find the town’s existing policy. The town has no additional policies in
existence with regard to body camera operation. use, data, access, or storage at this time.

Thank you in advance for your kind attention in this regard. If you have any questions.

please do not hesitate to contact me.

BCR/mmw

Cc:

Chief Frank Dorton
Mr. Timothy Taylor. Town Manager

able.

flstwodhy.

tfifective

TOWN OF RICHLANDS

RULES AND REGULATIONS

DEPARTMENT OF POLICE
SUBJECT: AudiolVisual Record-Capture Digital

Camcorders

NUMBER: 3-01

EFFECTIVE DATE: 01/01)2012

REVIEW DATE: 01/3112016

AMENDS/SUPERSEDES: Supersedes 3-xx, Jan 14
(Review) and ALL Previously Issued Orders or Policies

APPROVED: F. L. Dofton/

Chief of Police

VLEPSC STANDARDS:

NOTE: This order is for internal use only, and does not enlarge a sworn employee’s civil or cmnjinal liabibty In any way.
It should not be consvued as the creation
of a higher standard of safety or care in an evidentary sense, with respect to third party daims Violatons of this directive, if proven, can only form the basis of a
camplaint by this depacinent and then only in a nondudicial adminisbatve setting

POLICY:

Officers of
the Richlands Police Department shall use the issued Body Worn AudioNisual
Camcorders (BWC) when interviewing suspects of crimes,
traffic stops,
establishing probable cause for pedestrian stops and detentions, or any situation, condition, or
event having a potential for loss of life, injury, or damage to property.

field sobriety tests!

PURPOSE:

To establish policy and guidelines for electronic data collection resulting from the use of the BWC.
It also serves to direct officers and supervisors in the proper use and maintenance of the BWC.
The purpose of the BWC is to provide an accurate unbiased audio/visual record of enforcement
related and non-criminal incidents that will enhance criminal prosecutions and limit civil liabilities

Ill.

PROCEDURES:

A.

General guidelines for the use of BWC:

1.

2.

3.

The BWC is intended to supplement reports and investigations and ultimately aid
in prosecuting traffic and related offenses,
to improve officer performance
through training, and promote officer safety.

The BWC is to be used to document events, actions, or statements made during
arrests, interviews, and critical incidents in order to enhance report preparation
and investigation.

The BWC is meant to enhance the Department’s ability to review probable cause
for arrests, searches and seizures, arrest procedures, officer and suspect
interaction, and evidence for
investigative purposes, as well as for officer
evaluation and training.

B.

C.

The BWC shall not be deactivated until the enforcement action is completed.

Officers jjj not erase any audio and/or video on the BWC.

3-01.1

IV.

DATA MANAGEMENT

A.

B.

C.

D.

E.

F.

BWC recordings shall only be downloaded to computers operated and maintained by the
Town of Richlands.

Before going off-duty, officers shall download all recordings to a designated secure
server/computer. The Uniform Lieutenant will be contacted by the officer to copy any
data that is deemed to be of evidentiary value on a media storage device (i.e. CD-Rom,
flash drive, etc.) and entered into evidence. Officers shall note in incident, arrest and
related reports when video/audio recordings were made during the incident
in question.
Other data not copied to disc will remain on the secure server/computer for 90 days at
which time it shall be erased.

Data shall not be released to another criminal justice agency for trial or other reasons
without having a duplicate copy made and returned to safe storage; and

Data shall not be released to any outside non-criminal justice entity, regardless of the
content, without explicit authority from the Chief of Police or his/her designee.

The media storage device shall be retained for 3 years or until the case is resolved or
evidence is released, whichever is
longer, and then the media storage device or its
contents fljj be destroyed.

Digital copies for purposes not associated with the investigation or prosecution of a
violation of law will only be made and or created subject to one of the following:

1.

2.

V.

PROHIBITIONS

Permission from the Chief of Police or his/her designee; or

Required by court order.

A.

Any use of the BWC for any purpose other than official
violation of this policy. Non-law enforcement business can include, but is not limited to:

law enforcement business is a

1.

2.

3.

4.

Covertly recording other law enforcement personnel;

Recording a conversation with a supervisor, council member,
government employee;

or other

Personal use of the BWC; and

Recording a conversation that the officer is not party to, unless the officer is
handling a law enforcement incident and is in a lawful position when the taping
occurs.

B.

Officers shall not use the BWC to record a particular person based solely on the person’s
race, color, age, sex, marital status, sexual orientation, gender identity, creed religion,
ancestry, national origin or physical disability.

3-01.2

