SUFFOLK POLICE DEPARTMENT 

POLICY AND PROCEDURE 

NUMBER: 

3-36 

DATE: June 5, 2015 

Digital Recording Devices 

Thomas E. Bennett 

DATE: 

March 17, 2015 
November 23, 2012 

BY THE AUTHORITY OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE: 

SUPERSEDES: 

Special Order 06-15 
Video Recording Systems Policy 3-36 

CONTENTS 
I. 
II. 
III. 

Purpose 
Policy 
Procedure 
A.  Body Worn Cameras (BWCs) 

I.  Assignment 
2.  General Operation 

a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 

Equipment Check 
Activation 
Officer Statements 
Prohibitions and Exception 
End of Shift/Duty Requirements 

B.  In-Car Camera Systems 

I.  Assignment 
2.  General Operation 
C.  Supervisor Responsibilities 

I.  In-Car Camera Systems 
2.  Body Worn Cameras (BWCs) 
3. 

Inspection of Digital Recording Devices 

D.  Video Review 
Use ofBWC on School Property 
Court Use 
Retention 
Security 

IV. 
V. 
VI. 
VII. 

SPD ) ·)6:  DIGITA L RECORDING DEVICES 

EFFECTIVE DATE 0610512015 

I. 

Purpose 

The purpose of this policy is to set forth guidelines for the use, management, storage, and retrieval 
of audio-visual media recorded by body·worn cameras (BWCs), and in-car camera systems so that 
officers may record their contacts and interactions with the public in accordance with the law. All 
digital  recording  devices  as  included  within  this  policy  shall  be  used  to  assist  Department 
personnel  in  the  performance  of their  duties  by  providing  an  accurate  recorded  account  of an 
incident. 
(41.3.8(a)( 

II. 

Policy 

It is the policy of the Suffolk Police Department to facilitate transparency within the Department. 
One method will be the deployment of digital recording devices in both vehicles as well as body(cid:173)
worn cameras. 

III. 

Procedure 

A.  Body Worn Cameras (BWC) 

All mechanical issues, concerns, and functional needs or requirements as well as any software 
needs shall be addressed with the BWC Logistics Officer. Issues concerning policy or program 
needs andlor concerns shall be forwarded  to  the BWC Coordinator.  Both of these positions 
shall be designated and assigned by the Chief of Police. 

BWC Assignment 

I. 

Assignment 

BWCs  shall  be  assigned  to  all  members  of  Uniform  Patrol,  Neighborhood 
Enforcement  Team(s),  Motor  Carrier  Unit,  Traffic  Unit,  and  any  other members  or 
officers  as  designated by  the  Chief of Police or his  designee.  All  officers  assigned a 
BWC shall  wear the assigned camera during all scheduled duty shifts as well  as any 
security related secondary employment. Officers shall use only those BWCs issued to 
them by the Department unless outlined elsewhere within policy or otherwise approved 
by the  Chief of Police. The wearing of personal  video recorders, or those assigned to 
other officers is strictly prohibited. All users and supervisors of officers issued BWCs 
shall receive training on the proper function, use, capabilities and requirements of the 
BWC prior to personal assignment. 
(41.3.8(1)( 

2. 

General Operation 

a. 

Equipment Check 

i. 

All officers assigned a BWC shall pick up their assigned camera prior 
to  their shift or scheduled  security related  secoodary assignment.  As 
part of the daily equipment check, each officer assigned a BWC shall 
ensure  its  proper operation  in  accordance  with  training received  and 
manufacturer's directions. 

Page 2 of 11 

SPD  3·36:  DIGITAL RECORDING DEVICES 

EFFECTIVE DATE OMOSf.!OIS 

The  responsible  officer shall  immediately  report  any  malfunction  to 
the duty supervisor discovered during the initial daily equipment check 
or any time during the shift; additionally, an email shall be sent to  the 
Body Worn Camera Logistics Officer  (BWCLO) 
and 
arrange for the repair/replacement of the equipment by the BWCLO's 
next scheduled work day. 

advise 

to 

ii. 

iii. 

IV. 

Officers assigned a BWC shall be responsible for its operation during 
all  scheduled  shifts  as  well  as  scheduled  security  related  secondary 
employment.  If at any time during the officer's shift the BWC battery 
life expires or the camera itself malfunctions, the duty supervisor shall 
be notified. If the officer's camera battery has expired the officer shall 
notify the supervisor and a spare battery shall be checked out from the 
Precinct Supervisor Vehicle (PSV). If the officer is working a security 
related  secondary  assignment  then  the  duty  supervisor  of  the 
appropriate precinct shall be notified and the battery shall be provided 
if available. The spare battery shall be returned to  the supervisor prior 
to  the officer securing from duty. 

If the officer's camera malfunctions andlor becomes inoperable for any 
other reason the officer shall notify the BWCLO immediately by email 
that the officer's camera is no longer operational. That officer will then 
secure  a  new camera  from  the  BWCLO  by  the  next  scheduled  work 
day. 

The  BWCLO  shall  prepare  a  monthly  report  to  the  Administration 
Lieutenant  outlining  any  cameras  that  require  replacement  or repair 
within the last month.  The BWCLO shall give a status update of any 
equipment sent off for replacement from the previous months report to 
the Administration Lieutenant. 

b. 

Activation 

i. 

ii. 

Officers shall utilize one of the supplied mounting options. The camera 
shall  be  mounted  in  a  forward  facing  position  to  ensure  maximum 
footage capture. 

Officers shall activate the BWC to the record mode during each citizen 
encounter related to a call  for service, law enforcement action, traffic 
stop, andlor other police service not outlined as  prohibited within this 
policy.  The  recording  shall  continue  until  the  citizen  encounter  has 
ended or the subject has been placed into custody and the arrestee is in 
compliance  with  all  police  commands.  In  the  event  that  the arrestee 
becomes non-compliant, the camera shall be reactivated immediately. 

Page 3 of 11 

SPD 3·36:  DIGITAL RECORDING  DEV ICES 

EFFECTIVE DATE 0610512015 

This  includes  all  officers  responding,  primary  and  secondary  or 
supporting  officers.  Additionally,  tactical  activities  such  as  building 
searches,  vehicle  searches,  searches  for  suspects,  missing  persons, 
handling of evidence, and building checks at alanns shall be recorded. 
This 
issued  BWCs  when 
participating in a SWAT operation. 

includes  SWAT  officers  who  are 

iii. 

Body  Worn  cameras  shall  not  be  used  to  record  fonnal  witness  or 
take  witness  and  suspects 
suspect  statements.  Officers  shall 
Interviews  and 
statements 
Interrogations. 

in  accordance  with  SPD  3-18: 

c. 

Officer Statements 

Officers shall review all applicable video footage (to include supporting officer 
video footage)  prior to submission of any fonnal statement 

d. 

Prohibitions and Exceptions 

I. 

Prohibitions 
There are situations where it may not be appropriate to activate the 
BWC  (e.g.  restrooms).  The  following  list  includes  areas  where  the 
officer shall not activate the camera: 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

Infonnal citizen contact{s) (Le. those which are not related to a 
call for service and/or law enforcement action) 

Bathroom/personal  areas  and  locker  rooms  where  there  is  a 
reasonable expectation of privacy 

When  inside  a  medical  facility  where  there  is  a  reasonable 
expectation  of  privacy  (Le.  operating  rooms,  examination 
rooms,  versus  common  area{s)  of  the  Emergency  Room, 
etc.) 

Court- Officer  shall  not  wear  the  BWC  in  the  courthouse. 
(Officers  shall  leave  the  body  worn  cameras  in  their  patrol 
vehicle prior to entering the courthouse). 

When in front of the Magistrate 

When the vehicle camera is being utilized while transporting a 
prisoner 

Investigational Canvases 

Interactions with Confidential Infonnants (CIs) 

Routine communication with other Departmental personnel 

During infonnaVforrnal supervisor counseling sessions 

Page 4 of 11 

SPD )·)6:  DIGITAL RECORDING DEVICES 

EFFECTIVE DATE06IOS!20IS 

Exception:  if any  additional  law  enforcement  actions  as  noted  in 
III.A.2.b.ii., commences while involved in one of the above prohibited 
circumstances, the officer shall activate the BWC until the conclusion 
of the incident. 

ii. 

Exceptions 

• 

• 

• 

[n  locations  where  individuals  have a  reasonable  expectation 
of privacy (such as  the interior of residence), the resident may 
decline  to  be  recorded  unless  the  recording  is  being  made 
pursuant  to  an  arrest,  a  search  of  the  residence  or  of the 
individuals. This exception does not apply to those individuals 
who have no legal  right to occupancy of the space in question. 

[f a citizen refuses to  make a statement because they are being 
recorded, the officer may discontinue recording and document 
in accordance with the below direction. 

Anytime the BWC  is  deactivated when otherwise required  by 
this policy to record, the officer shall if possible advise first on 
recording  before  deactivation,  followed  by  a  field  contact 
within the Record Management System (RMS) module stating 
a detailed reason why the termination or interruption occurred. 
[f there  is  any  doubt  as  to  whether  a  situation  should  be 
recorded,  consult  with  a  supervisor.  [f  the  supervisor  is 
unavailable, and it is possible to  record, then the incident shall 
be recorded. 

e. 

End of Shift/Duty Requirements 

i. 

Reporting 

Any  time  an  incident  report  is  generated,  it  shall  be  annotated  by 
checking on page two (2) of the Incident Base Report (IBR) that video 
is available if there is video footage of the event.  Supporting officers 
shall be listed within the narrative. 

ii. 

Tagging 

a)  The  officer  shall  ensure  that  all  videos  shall  be  appropriately 
"tagged" or "marked" prior to securing from duty (e.g.  complaint, 
evidence,  Internal  Affairs,  non-evidence,  use  of  force,  and/or 
training).  This  may  be  done  via  the  accompanying  phone 
application  or  the  system  program  in  accordance  with  training 
received.  Investigating  officers  shall  ensure  that  any  supporting 
officers who were present at the scene of an incident are advised to 
tag  their related  videos as  evidentiary.  This advisement shall  be 
annotated within the narrative of the incident report(s). Supporting 
officers shall tag their associated video footage as evidentiary and 
share the video file with the primary investigating officer. 

Page 5 of 11 

SPD 3-36:  DIGITAL RECORDING  DEVICES 

EFFECTIVE DATE 06JOS1201 5 

Once  notification  is  given  (to  the  supporting  officer)  that  video 
footage is needed, the supporting officer is responsible for tagging 
and sharing the video with the primary officer by the conclusion of 
their next scheduled shift. 

b)  If a  complaint  is  associated  with  a  recorded  event,  or an  officer 
believes an incident may generate a complaint, the Officer shall tag 
the video as a complaint. 

iii. 

Tum-in 

The  BWC  shall  be  docked  for  downloading  andlor  charging  in  the 
assigned  docking  station  prior  to  the  officer  securing  from  duty_ 
Officers who have a pending shift outside of normal assignment (e.g. 
secondary  employment,  special  detail,  etc.)  shall  be  permitted  to 
maintain possession of the camera until their next regular duty period 
at which time it shall be turned in as specified for download. 

iv. 

Syncing 

Downloading  or  uploading  to  any  device  other  than  the  dock  as 
assigned at the precinct is  strictly prohibited. The only exception is  in 
the case of serious incidents (i.e. officer involved shootings, in-custody 
deaths, etc.) where the camera is turned over to Internal Affairs which 
will tag the video. 

B. 

In-Car Camera Systems 

I. 

Assignment 

Each in-car camera system installed in a police vehicle shall be the responsibility of the 
officer  assigned  to  that  vehicle  and  shall  be  maintained  in  accordance  with  the 
manufacturer's recommendations as well as this policy. 

2. 

General Operation 

a. 

Equipment Check 

As  part of the  daily equipment check,  each officer operating a vehicle with a 
camera system shall ensure that the system (including portable microphone) is 
functioning and that activation occurs when the emergency lights and portable 
microphone  are  activated.  The  officer  shall 
immediately  report  any 
malfunction  to  the  duty  supervisor discovered  during  the  initial  equipment 
check or any time during the shift. 

Page 60fl1 

SPD ) ·)6,  DIGITAL RECORDING  DEVICES 

EfFEC"fIVE DATE 06!OSIlOI S 

b. 

Activation 

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

v. 

Officers  shall  ensure  that  the  in-car  camera  system  is  activated  for 
every  citizen  contact.  The  officer  shall  not  deactivate/disable  the 
system for any reason until the citizen contact or enforcement action is 
complete. 
All in-car camera systems are equipped with a microphone. The 
assigned officer(s) shall keep the microphone on their person 
(preferably in the issued belt clip carrier) at all times while on duty. 

The officer shall ensure that the camera is positioned and adjusted to 
record the contact if at all possible. 

The officer shall ensure that hislher wireless microphone is activated in 
order to capture the audio portion of the contact. The officer will, when 
possible provide a narration to explain the reason for the contact or 
enforcement action. 

Supervisors  shall  ensure  that  the  captured  video  footage  from  those 
vehicles assigned an in-car camera system is transferred to the precinct 
video server no less than twice per month. 

a) 

b) 

If the  hard  drive  must  be  removed,  a  supervisor  must  be 
contacted.  Supervisors are the only employees with the master 
key to  the hard drive.  Supervisors shall ensure that  the  key  is 
secured and inaccessible to officers. 
(41.3.8(d)\ 

The supervisor shall replace the hard drive in the vehicle when 
it has finished downloading. 

C. 

Supervisor Responsibilities 

Supervisors shall ensure that officers  utilize in-car camera systems and BWe's according to 
policy guidelines. 

I. 

In-Car Camera Systems 

a. 

b. 

Uniform Patrol supervisors shall  maintain  the keys  used  to  access  the  in-car 
camera  systems'  digital  hard  drive  and  digital  system  computer.  Uniform 
Patrol supervisors shall be responsible for ensuring that all keys are maintained 
securely.  Uniform Patrol supervisors shall not allow any officer access to  the 
keys or allow any officer to access/remove/replace any recording media. 

Prior to  replacing  the  in-car  camera  system  hard  drive,  the  supervisor shall 
ensure  that  all  previous  video  has  been  transferred  to  the  precinct  video 
recorder  and  is  able  to  be  recorded  over  according  to  the  manufacturer's 
recommendations. 

Page 7 of 11 

SPD 3-36:  DIGITAL RECORDING DEVICES 

EFFECTIVE DATE 0610512015 

2. 

Body Worn Cameras (BWCs) 

a. 

b. 

c. 

If a  complaint  is  associated  with  a  recorded  event,  or an  officer believes  an 
incident may generate a complaint,  the supervisor shall  ensure the  video  has 
been tagged correctly. 

Supervisors  shall  ensure  that  all  supporting  video  footage  has  been 
appropriately shared  upon  case report  submission and review.  This shall  be 
checked  upon  the  SPD  Form  #023:  Case  Report  Review  Form  in  the 
appropriate location. 

The Supervisor shall provide additional batteries in case of expiration or fault. 
Four additional batteries shall be  kept in a charged status  within the  Precinct 
Supervisor Vehicle.  In the event the officer requires a battery during shift, the 
officer will be permitted to use a battery from  the PSV.  The Supervisor shall 
log the battery into PSV Log Book that is located in each PSV. 

3. 

Inspection of Digital Recording Devices 

All  BWCs  and  in-car  audio/video  shall  be  inspected  to  ensure  equipment  is 
working  properly  each  month  by  a  supervisor.  This  is  included  in  the  formal  line 
inspection. (SPD Forrn#050: Line Inspection Form) 

(41.3.8(e)( 

D. 

Video Review 

I. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

Officers  are  required  to  periodically ensure  that  the  camera  is  positioned  in  such  a 
manner as to  provide maximum video coverage. 

The supervisor shall review their officers'  recordings within seven (7) days of initial 
assignment (BWC), and thereafter on a quarterly basis. This may be accomplished by 
viewing a sampling of each officer's recordings and comparing those recordings with 
the officer's CAD activity report. The supervisor may review the activity report and 
recordings  with  the  assigned  officer to  correct any deficiencies  that are  identified  as 
appropriate. The supervisor shall  review  a minimum of three (3)  videos  per quarter, 
one (I) of which must be footage from an in-car camera system. 
(41.3.8(g») 

Supervisors shall document the video review on SPD Form #118: Video Inspection. 

Failure to conduct the review as required shall result in disciplinary action. 

Any camera which may contain recordings from an officer involved incident serious in 
nature  (i.e. officer  involved  shootings,  in-custody  deaths,  etc_)  shall  immediately be 
seized by the supervisor and turned over to the Internal Affairs Sergeant. This includes 
BWCs as well as any hard drives. 

In the event of a complaint, the supervisor taking the complaint shall determine if there 
(41.3.8(c») 
is any BWC footage of the event. 

7. 

Supervisors shall include any BWC footage in the complaint packet. 

Page 80f11 

SPD J·J6:  DIGITAL RECORDING  DEVICES 

EFFECTIVE DATE 061051201 5 

8. 

9. 

10. 

Supervisors shall include any BWC footage in the use of force packet. 

(41.3.8(c)( 

If it is deemed that pursuant to video review the officer's choice of location for camera 
wear is supplying insufficient or substandard video footage, the supervisor shall advise 
the officer of the need for adjustment and document accordingly on the SPO fonn # I 18 
Video Inspection fonn. 

After two subsequent advisements of this nature resulting from the same location, the 
supervisor shall document within the squad level  file  with the officer's signature, and 
the officer shall then be required to utilize one of the other provided mounting options. 
Failure to adhere to this requirement will result in a level I complaint  in  accordance 
with SPO 2-12: Internal Affairs and Administrative Investigations. 

If a supervisor becomes aware that an officer has not turned on the BWC the supervisor 
shall  advise  the  officer  of this  occurrence  and  document  accordingly  within  the 
squad level  file.  After two  subsequent advisements of the officer not turning on the 
BWC  the  supervisor  shall  document  the  third  occurrence  with  the  officer's 
signature.  A  third  occurrence  of not  turning  on  the  BWC  will  result  in  a  Level  I 
complaint  in  accordance  with  SPO  2-12:  Internal  Affairs  and  Administrative 
Investigations. A forth violation will result in a Level 2 complaint in  accordance 
with SPO 2-12:  Internal Affairs and Administrative Investigations. 

IV. 

Use of BWC on Scbool Property 

A. 

B. 

The use of BWC in school clinics  is  prohibited.  Officers shall not activate cameras while 
inside school clinics and school locker rooms. 

School Administrators requesting BWC video for disciplinary purposes shall make a written 
request  through the appropriate  School  Resource Officer (SRO).  The SRO shall  forward 
the request to the supervisor in charge ofSRO's.  That request shall then be forwarded to the 
Administration Lieutenant who will be responsible for fulfilling the request. 

V. 

Court Use 

A. 

It shall be the responsibility of the involved officer to  notify the Commonwealth's Attorney 
and/or the City Attorney when a recording exists of any criminal enforcement related action 
or driving under the  influence  where a  subject is  charged. This  will  be  done  to  assist  the 
Commonwealth's Attorney's Office in satisfying requirements under Virginia Law relative 
to  discovery  in  felony  and  misdemeanor  cases.  The  Commonwealth's  Attorney's  Office 
shall be notified in writing for criminal enforcement actions by checking "video available" 
on the case report cover sheet. 

Officers  who  require  a  copy of a  recording  for  evidentiary purposes  shall  create  four  (4) 
copies. One copy shall be placed in Property and Evidence. The second copy shall be placed 
with  the  officer's  case  file.  The  third  and  fourth  copy  shall  be  forwarded  to  the 
Commonwealth's Attorney's Office for court use. 

Page 9 of 11 

SPD )·)6:  DIGITAL RECORDING DEVICES 

EFFECTIVE DATE 061051;1015 

B.  When an officer intends to  introduce a video recording of an incident the officer shall notify 
the  Sheriffs  Department  so  that  arrangements  can  be  made  to  have  a  monitor  and  the 
appropriate media player present in the courtroom. 

C.  Officers will retrieve and return video recordings for courtroom presentation or consultation 
with the Commonwealth's Attorney's Office to  Property and Evidence in accordance with 
SPD 3-21; Property and Evidence. 

VI. 

Retention 

(41.3.8( c) I 

All video captured shall be retained until purging and deletion is approved by the Chief of Police. 

A. 

B. 

For  the  purpose  of each  in-car  camera  each  precinct  shall  have  one  designated  server 
dedicated  to  the download and  storage of video.  These computers  are  password-protected 
and may only be accessed by supervisors and Information Technologies (IT) personnel. 

In-car and body camera recordings shall be retained in accordance with the City's Records 
Retention Program, as mirrored by the Virginia Public Records Act, for a total of thirty (30) 
days unless designated for further retention. 

C.  When a recording becomes evidentiary in nature, it shall be handled in accordance with this 

policy as outlined above as well as SPD 3-21 ; Property and Evidence. 

VII. 

Security 

A.  All  recording  media,  images,  and  audio  are  the  sole  property  of  the  Suffolk  Police 
Department and shall not be copied, released, or disseminated in any form or manner outside 
the  parameters of this  policy without the expressed written consent of the Chief of Police. 
Under no circumstances will any member of the Suffolk Police Department make a personal 
copy of any recorded  event without prior written permission  of the Chief of Police or his 
designee. 

B.  Other than  for  court purposes, officers shall not edit, alter, erase, duplicate, copy, share, or 
otherwise  distribute  in  any  manner  any  Department  recordings  without  prior  written 
authorization  and  approval  of  the  Chief  of  Police  or  his  designee.  Deletion  of  any 
recording(s) or portions thereof is strictly prohibited. Exception to this is only permissible in 
the  event  of an  accidental  recording  and  must  be  submitted  in  memorandum  form  and 
approved by the Chief of Police in accordance with state record retention laws. 

C.  The usage of any  department  issued  camera  while  off-duty  is  strictly prohibited (security 
related  secondary employment as  mentioned count as  an on-duty status and as  such  is  not 
prohibi ted by this section.) 

D.  Any request for information by anyone other than law enforcement personnel shall require a 

FOIA request (written or verbal), subpoena duces tecum, or other legal  request. 

E.  Any law enforcement agency request for video shall be submitted in writing to the Office of 

the Chief of Police who shall approve or disapprove said request. 

Page 10 of 11 

SPD 3-36:  DIGITAL RECORDING DEVICES 

EFFECTIVE DATE 061051201 S 

F. 

G. 

The release of the material may necessitate the consultation of the City Attorney and/or the 
Commonwealth's Attorney. 

If recordings are evidence, they shall be handled in accordance with SPD 3-21: Property and 
Evidence. 

H.  Unauthorized use of recordings is prohibited. 

Page 11 of 11 

