  SMITHFIELD POLICE DEPT.     

 GENERAL ORDERS 

SUBJECT:  Body worn audio/visual 
camera (BWC) 

  NUMBER:  2-44 

EFFECTIVE DATE:  4/12 

AMENDS/SUPERSEDES:   
 
VLEPSC STANDARDS:   

  REVIEW DATE: 5/9/12 

  APPROVED: _______________________ 
                           Chief of Police 

 

 
NOTE:   
 

This rule or regulation is for internal use only, and does not enlarge an officer's civil 
or  criminal  liability  in  any  way.    It  should  not  be  construed  as  the  creation  of  a 
higher standard of safety or care in an evidentiary sense, with respect to third party 
claims.    Violations  of  this  directive,  if  proven,  can  only  form  the  basis  of  a 
complaint by this department, and then only in a non-judicial administrative setting. 

INDEX WORDS:  

Equipment, BWC, body worn camera 

POLICY: 

The Smithfield Police Department has adopted the use of body worn audio/visual cameras 
(BWC)  to  aid  in  the  accurate  documentation  of  violations,  citizen  contacts,  officer 
performance evaluations and training. In order to maximize the usefulness of the equipment 
in  these  and  related  areas,  officers  shall  follow  the  procedures  for  BWC  set  forth  in  this 
policy.  

PURPOSE: 

The  purpose  of  this  policy  is  to  provide  officers  with  guidelines  for  electronic  data 
collection resulting from the use of body worn audio/visual cameras (BWC)  

PROCEDURES: 

A. 

General Operations of BWC: 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
I.  
 
 

 
II. 
      
 

 
 
III. 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

1. 

An  officer  issued  a  BWC  shall  be  responsible  for  its  use  and  care.  The 
  BWC  shall  be  maintained  in  accordance  with  the  manufacturer’s 
 

recommendations.  

2. 

Each  officer  shall  check  that  the  BWC  is  functioning  properly  prior  to 

2-44.1 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

each shift.  It shall be the responsibility of the officer to immediately report 
any malfunction to the duty supervisor. 

 
3.   When the BWC is recording a police contact, it will not be turned off until 

the contact has concluded. 

4.  

Officers will not attempt to erase or alter any data recordings. 

 
5. 

6. 

Battery life on the Taser Axon Flex is approximately 12 hours of recording 
time. 

When possible, the operator shall attempt to provide a narration to explain 
the contact or enforcement action. 

 
 

 

 
 

 

B. 

Data Management: 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
III. 
 
 
 
 
 

The  BWC  and  all  data  recordings  are  considered  to  be  property  of  the 
Smithfield  Police  Department  and  shall  not  be  copied  or  transmitted 
without the permission of the Chief of Police. 

A supervisor shall be responsible for the retrieval of the recorded media.  
Officers will notify the shift supervisor as soon as practical of a recorded 
incident  that  has  evidentiary value.  The supervisor will determine if the 
recorded incident should be removed immediately to preserve evidence. 

Recorded incidents that are determined to be of evidentiary value will be 
treated as evidence and NOT stored in the case file.  Refer to G.O. 2-18 
Property and Evidence for evidence procedures. 

Recorded  data  that  is  not  of  evidentiary  value  will  be  maintained  for  30 
days from its origination date. 

Copies and dissemination of any recorded data shall be requested through 
the Chief of Police or his designee.   

If  an  incident  report  is  completed  for  a  recorded  event,  officers  will 
document that fact in the narrative of the IBR. 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

 

PROCEDURES – PATROL ACTIVITIES 

This  procedure  is  not  intended  to  describe  every  possible situation in which the 
BWC  may  be  used,  although  there  are  many  situations  where  its  use  is   
appropriate.  The  officer  may  activate  the  BWC  any  time  the  officer  believes  its 
use would be appropriate and valuable to document an incident. 

2-44.2 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
A. 

BWC Activation 

1. 

Every  attempt  shall  be  made  to  ensure  all  citizen  contacts  are  recorded 

  with the BWC to include, but not limited to: 
 

a. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
g. 
h. 
i. 
j. 

Traffic stops    
Priority responses 
Vehicle pursuits 
Suspicious vehicles 
Arrests 
Vehicle searches 
Physical or verbal altercations 
Use of force incidents 
DUI/DUID investigations including field sobriety tests 
Any  call  for  service  involving  a  crime  where  the  recorder 
  may  aid  in  the  apprehension  and/or  prosecution  of  a 
 

suspect. 

 

 
B. 

 
2. 

3. 

Transport of any person of the opposite sex the BWC shall be activated. 

Any other circumstances where the officer believes that a recording of an 
incident would be appropriate.   

 

BWC Activation Not Required 

1. 

2. 

 
 

 
 
 

Activation of the BWC is not required during breaks, when not in service 
or actively on patrol, and/or when driving to a non-emergency situation. 

No member of this department may surreptitiously record a conversation 
of any other member of this department except with a court order or when 
authorized  by  the  Chief  of  Police  or  designee  for  the  purpose  of 
conducting a criminal investigation or as an administrative function.  

IV. 

TRAINING 

 
 

All officers and supervisors shall be trained on the use of the BWC and shall  
become familiar with this procedure prior to deployment of the BWC. 

 

2-44.3 

