Eric  C. Howlett
Attomey

Direct: (804)  783-7224
E-mail  : EHowlett@SandsAnderson.com

Rrct-MoND  . McLEAN. FREDER|CKSBURG

CHR|ST|ANSBURG . RAt-EtcH

SANDs ANDERSoN  PC

www.SANDSANDERSoN.coM

llll  EastMainStreet
Post Office Box 1998
Richmond,  Virginia 23218-1998
Main: (804)  648-1636
Fax: (804)  783-7291

June 17,2015

Bv E-mail and First Class Mail
Mr. Frank  Knaack
American  Civil Liberties Union  of Virginia
701E. Franklin Street,  Suite 1412
Richmond, Virginia 23219
fknaack@acluva.org

Re:  Freedom of Information  Request

Body Camera  Equipment and Policy
Our File No.: 006738-090039

Dear Mr. Knaack:

This firm  has been appointed  to serve as City Attomey for the City of Hopewell,

Virginia. I am writing  in response to your request  dated  June 12, 2015, regarding  the above-
referenced matter. In accordance  with subsection B of Virginia  Code ç 2.2-3704  ([PJrocedure
þr requesting  records  and responding  to request), please  find the document  responsive to your
request  attached  to this letter.

Please let us know if we can be of further assistance.

Sincerely,

Eric C. Howlett

Enclosures
cc:  Stefan M. Calos, Esquire  (by e-mail)(w/o  encls.)

Luther Sodat,  Sheriff

NOTE:  This order is for internal use only, and 
liability  in any way. lt shoutd not be co 

March 1,2015

4113t15

fs civit or criminal
a higher standard  of
claims. Violations of

r. PoLtcY:

It shall be the policy of the Hopewell  Sheriffs Office to utilize Body-Worn Camera
(BWC) equipment  to assist agency personnel  in the performancé  or their duties
by providing an accurate and 
unbiased recorded event of an incident.
integrity  of
will adhere
n assigned
disciplinary

- 

II. PURPOSE:

The purpose  of this.policy is to provide  guidance on the proper use of the Body-Worn
Camera (BWc) and the proper  storage óf data retrieved  byine use of this equipr"nt.

III. DEFINITIONS:

Bocly-Worn. Camera ßWC): A recording system that captures audio and video
that is individually  worn by officers anð ¡ncludes, at a minimum,  a camera and
recorder.

3-58.4

IV. PROCEDURES  - BODY.WORN CAMERA  SYSTEM:

Officers  assigned  a BWC  shall don a fully-charged system prior to their tour of duty.
In order to best capture that which is observed by an officer using a BWC, the
camera should be located  on the outer most  garment, ie: shirt, jacket, vest. Officers
shall activate the BWC whenever the Deputy determines  there is a need to
capture  the event. This would include, but is not limited to, traffic  stops,
suspicious person contacts, potential volatile situations in or around the courts
building. The BWC may also be activated whenever the officer feels its use
would be beneficial to his/her official duties. Once the camera is activated to
the "record" mode, it shall remain on until the event has concluded.

An officer who is lawfully  present  in an area protected  by the Fourth Amendment
shall activate the BWC when there is reasonable  suspicion  that a'crime is being
committed, has been committed, or is about  to be committed, or that evidence of a
crime is present. In the absence of such criteria,  the officer  must turn off the BWC if
asked to do so by a person  with apparent  authority  over the constitutionally-
protected area. As a reminder, entry into a Fourth Amendment protected area
requires  probable  cause and a warrant or warrant exception. (ex. Magistrates
Office/Judges  Chambers/Clerk  of Courts  Office/Medical Facility)

lnspections and maintenance  of the BWC shall be the responsibility  of the assigned
officer. Only authorized personnel to whom a recording  system is assigned may
use, touch or handle that recording system.  Unauthorized personnel shall not use,
touch or handle any recording  system.

V. DOCUMENTATION:

Officers  will document the use of any video recording  system in reports,  citations,
affidavits, field interviews, etc. Before writing  reports involving the response to
resistance, critical incidents, confessions or admissions, officers will review  any
video. Officers are encouraged  to review available video while preparing  written
reports to ensure  accuracy.

Note: The BWC records  at a level beyond human  ocular  capability.

VI. RESTRICTIONS:

The following uses of Body worn recording  systems  are strictly  prohibited:

1. Using a mobile video recording  system  to take a statement in lieu of a sworn

written statement,  unless  approved  by a supervisor.

2. Video-recording undercover  officers  or confidential informants.
3, Duplicating or distributing  recordings  for other than official  law enforcement

purposes.

3-58.4

4.

5.
6.

Permitting  citizens to review recordings  for other than official law
enforcement  purposes.
Altering captured  data.
Accessing  recordings  for other than case-related purposes,  responses
resistance,  formal or informal  complaints,  legal review, pursuant
established  policy or as directed by the Sheriff or designee.

to
to
7. Making  or creating, by separate  device  or othenruise, a copy of any recording
8. Posting to social media  sites without  approval  by the Sheriff.

except  as directed  by the Sheriff  or designee.

VII. SYSTEM  ADMINISTRATOR:

It will be the responsibility of each officer  to download  and safeguard  any and all
videos  recorded  by the officer.  ln the event  the video has evidentiary value  it will be
entered into evidence via the Hopewell  Police  Departments  Evidence Room.. The
video will be made available  by the officer  if it is requested  by a supervisor.

VIII. CONFIDENTIALITY:

All recording media, images, and audio are property of the Hopewell Sheriffs
Office and will not be copied, released,  or disseminated  in any form or manner
outside the parameters of this policy without the expressed written consent of the
Sheriff or his designee.  Under no circumstances will any employee of the
Hopewell  Sheriffs Office make a personal copy of any recorded event without
prior written permission  from the Sheriff  or his designee.

IX. RETENTION:

The officer will maintain  the video on file until it is determined  that there is no further
need of the video

X. VIDEO SHARING:

At times, officers  will be asked permission to view video evidence  that they have
collected with outside  agencies  such as the Commonwealth  Attorney's  Office.
Officers are permitted to share with the Commonwealth Attorney's Office  as well
as any Federal, State or Local agency that is in need of the video for a law
enforcement  purpose for a duration that satisfïes  that purpose.  In the event that
video evidence is provided via outside  request the Sheriff  must be notified.
Additionally,  officers are permitted to allow that evidence to be downloaded by
the requesting  agency for their law enforcement  purpose if necessary.  Any other
request for video,  either Evidentiary,  Non-Evidentiary or Training/Demo,  shall be
approved  in writing  by the Sheriff  or his designee prior to release.

XI.TRAINING:

Officers  shall be trained and receive  instruction  prior to being assigned  a BWC.

3-58.4

