 
 
 

 
 
 
I.  
 

 
II.  
 

CBN/Regent Campus Police Department 

       Directives Manual 

Subject:  Body Worn Cameras 

Number: D-1.9 

Approved by:  C. A. Mitchell Sr. 
                             Chief of Police 

Amends: 
Reference: CALEA STD.  

Effective Date: July 1, 2014 

Rescinds:  

Purpose 

The purpose of this policy is to provide police personnel with guidelines for the proper 
use of audio/video recording equipment to ensure the following results: 
 
A. 
B. 
C. 

Increased officer safety. 
Produce more effective materials for the training of police officers. 
Provide  officers  additional  methods  of  collecting  evidence  to  prosecute  those 
who violate the law. 
Used as a tool for investigative processes. 
Support Police accountability and transparency. 

D. 
E. 

Policy  

It shall be the policy of the CBN/Regent Campus Police Department to utilize digital 
audio/video  cameras  to  enhance  the  Department’s  mission.    To  ensure  the  efficient 
operation of the system and maintain evidentiary integrity, officers who are assigned as 
video camera operators will receive training in their use and capabilities. 
 
All  audio/video  recordings  are  the  property  of  the  CBN/Regent  Campus  Police 
Department.  
 
A body worn camera is an “on-the-body” video and audio recording system assigned to 
an officer as an additional means of documenting specific incidents in the field.  
 
1. 

All  non-casual  interactions  with  the  public  in  the  performance  of  their  duties 
shall  be  recorded  using  Department  assigned  body  camera  equipment  and 
following the procedures prescribed within this policy. 

 
2. 

 
3. 

Body worn camera recording equipment shall only be utilized by officers who 
have received the Department’s training in its use. 

In general, officers should not activate the body worn camera device or shall use 
caution when entering a public locker room, changing room, restroom, doctor’s 

D-1.9 

Body Worn Cameras 

Page 2 of 4 

 

office  or  other  place(s)  where  an  individual  -  unrelated  to  the  investigation  - 
would have a reasonable expectation of privacy. 

 

a. 

b. 

Use of the body worn camera device in a hospital setting shall be limited 
to investigative use only.   

Officers  will  not  record  a  patient’s  medical  interaction  and  procedures 
with hospital personnel unless it directly relates to the investigation and 
hospital staff is made aware prior to the recording taking place.  Officers 
will remain cognizant of HIPAA laws and guidelines. 

Officers  shall  not  intentionally  record  confidential  informants  or  undercover 
officers  unless  the  recording  is  conducted  specifically  for  the  purpose  of 
documenting  a  sting,  drug  purchase/sale  or  other  undercover  operation  in 
furtherance of a criminal investigation. 

Officers  will  not  make  surreptitious  recordings  of  conversations  with  other 
Department  members  except  when  necessary  in  the  course  of  a  criminal 
investigation  and/or  for  Department  administrative  investigations  without  the 
express consent of the Chief of Police. 

Body worn cameras shall not be used to record personal activities.   

Wearing body worn cameras into any courtroom is PROHIBITED. 

Officers  are  responsible  for  the  proper  care  of  body  worn  camera  equipment 
assigned to them and will immediately report any loss of, or damage to, any part 
of the body worn camera equipment to their immediate supervisor. 

No officer shall attempt to erase, edit or otherwise alter any data captured by the 
body worn camera. 

All body worn camera recordings are only for official law enforcement purposes 
and  shall  be  considered  property  of 
the  CBN/Regent  Campus  Police 
Department.  Accessing,  copying  or  uploading  to  personal  computers  or  other 
media storage devices is strictly prohibited.   
 

 

 

 
4. 

 
5. 

 
6. 
 
7. 
 
8. 

 
9. 

 
10. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

D-1.9 

Procedure  

Body Worn Cameras 

 

Page 3 of 4 

 

The assigned Axon shall be worn at all times by the officer on duty.  The 
approved location on the uniform is the front, left pocket with the clip inserted 
into the open pen slot.   

At the beginning of each shift, the officer shall determine whether their 
recording equipment is working satisfactorily. If a problem is found, the officer 
shall arrange for repair or adjustment and immediately report this to his 
supervisor.  

Supervisors shall assign and document one Axon camera to each on-coming 
officer at the beginning of the shift. 

Officers shall turn in their issued Axon camera at the end of each shift.  

 
NOTE: If the Axon malfunctions or becomes inoperable, the officer shall report to a supervisor 
immediately. This shall be noted in all written reports so that there is a consistent record. 
Officers should not utilize other Officers’ assigned Axon equipment at any time.  
 
EXCEPTION: A scene where the Officer does not have an assigned Axon and needs an audio 
and video recording for criminal investigative purposes. This equipment use is temporary, and 
upon conclusion of the video, the Axon will be returned to the assigned officer.  
 

5.  

The Axon shall be utilized during all investigative or enforcement contacts. 
(e.g., pedestrian and vehicle stops, consensual encounters, calls for service, etc.) 

III. 
 

 

 

 

 

1.  

 
2.  

 
3. 

 
4.  

 
 
 
 

Officers shall place the Axon in the “Event Mode” as soon as practical at 
the onset of a given situation.  

Once in the Event Mode, officers shall continue to record until the 
completion of the event or until they have left the scene. This is to 
include the recording of associated statements.  

a.  

b.  

c.  

Additional arriving units to a scene shall place their Axon cameras in the 
Event Mode as soon as possible as detailed in (b) above.  

 
NOTE: If circumstances prevent an officer from recording a contact, then this must be noted - 
along with the explanation - in any subsequent report.  
 

 

 

6.  

7.  

 

 
 
NOTE:  

D-1.9 

Body Worn Cameras 

Page 4 of 4 

 

 

Once activated, a recording should not be intentionally terminated until the 
conclusion of the encounter unless tactical, safety or practical reasons dictate 
otherwise.  

a. 

b. 

In instances of response to an ongoing crime scene where extended 
waiting time takes place, recording may be terminated early with 
supervisor approval.  
 
Anytime a recording is terminated early, the reasons shall be 
documented in any subsequent report or memorandum.  

 

Nothing in this policy shall prohibit an officer from activating their Axon 
whenever they deem the use of the camera appropriate.  

 

Audio or video recordings of investigative or enforcement actions are evidence, and 
subject to rules of disclosure. The Department regulates and controls all forms of 
evidence collection and storage. 

 

This policy will become effective July 1, 2014 
By order of: 

 
 
Effective Date:  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
C. A. Mitchell Sr. 
Chief of Police  

