ACLU OF VIRGINIA MODEL BWC POLICY 

1.00 

EFFECTIVE:   

REVISED:   

 

____________________________________ 

 

SUBJECT:  BODY WORN CAMERA (BWC) RECORDING DEVICES AND IMAGING 
EQUIPMENT  

 

 
1.00.1  PURPOSE 

PAGE:  

The purpose of this policy is to provide direction for the use of audio, visual and imaging recording 
by Body Worn Camera (BWC) systems. The use of Department-approved body worn camera systems 
can  provide  powerful  evidence  of  criminal  activity  and  has  proven  to  be  a  valuable  tool  for  law 
enforcement in documenting enforcement members’ honesty, integrity, and professionalism. 
 

1.00.2  POLICY   

Enforcement  members  (commissioned  officers  and  animal  services  officers)  shall  use  their  BWC 
systems and all other recording and imaging devices in compliance with manufacturer’s operational 
guidelines, Department training and this policy.  It is the policy of the Department to authorize the 
use of BWC to collect audio-visual evidence of criminal activity, to evaluate enforcement members’ 
performance, and as a training tool for members. The benefits of the use of these devices can be a 
useful tool in prosecutions.  
 

1.00.3 PROCEDURES – BWC  

A.  Only members with enforcement authority shall be permitted to wear a BWC. 

B.  Enforcement members, who serve an undercover role in a specialized assignment on a task force 
such  as  DEA,  will  not  be  subject  to  this  policy  and  will  refer  to  the  governing  policies  and 
procedures for that particular special assignment. 

C.  Enforcement  members  engaging  in  off-duty  assignments  shall  adhere  to  this  policy  while 

fulfilling the off-duty obligation in any capacity for the Department. 

D.  BWC’s should be worn in a location and manner that maximizes the camera’s ability to capture 

video footage of the enforcement member’s activities. 

E.  Enforcement  members  shall  activate  the  BWC  at  the  inception  of  all  investigative  or 
enforcement contacts that are conducted in person with a member of the public, until the contact 
with the member of the public has concluded and the enforcement member has left the scene, 
which include but are not limited to; pedestrian stops, consensual encounters, calls-for-service, 
on-view events, SWAT deployments.  

F.  The enforcement member shall activate the BWC at the first reasonable opportunity to do so, 
unless  an  immediate  threat  to  the  enforcement  member’s  life  or  safety  makes  activating  the 
BWC impossible or dangerous, in which case the enforcement member should activate the BWC 
as soon as it is safe to do so. 

ACLU OF VIRGINIA MODEL BWC POLICY 

G.  Additional  arriving  enforcement  members  who  are  equipped  with  BWC  shall  activate  their 
cameras  and  begin  recording  the  situation  upon  their  arrival  until  the  enforcement  member 
leaves the scene.   

H.  BWC’s shall not  be used surreptitiously.  Enforcement members wearing a BWC  shall notify 
any person(s) that they are being recorded by a body camera as close to  the inception of the 
encounter as is reasonably possible, unless an immediate threat to the enforcement member’s 
life  or  safety  makes  notification  impossible  or  dangerous,  in  which  case  the  enforcement 
member should notify the person(s) as soon as it is safe to do so.. 

I.  During  consensual  encounters  in  locations  where  members  of  the  public  have  a  reasonable 
expectation of privacy, such as a residence or hospital room, an enforcement member shall offer 
the member of the public the option to have the BWC discontinue its recording.  If the member 
of the public requests the recording be discontinued the enforcement member shall immediately 
discontinue use of the BWC. 

J.  When  interacting  with  an  apparent  crime  victim,  the  enforcement  member  shall,  as  soon  as 
feasible, ask the apparent crime victim if they want the enforcement member to discontinue use 
of the BWC. If the apparent crime victim responds affirmatively, the enforcement member shall 
immediately discontinue use of the BWC. 

K.  When interacting with a person seeking to anonymously report a crime or assist in ongoing law 
enforcement  investigation,  an  enforcement  member  shall,  as  soon  as  feasible,  ask  the  person 
seeking  to  remain  anonymous,  if  they  would  like  to  remain  anonymous  and    would  like  the 
enforcement member to discontinue use of the BWC. If the person seeking to remain anonymous 
responds affirmatively, the enforcement member shall immediately discontinue use of the BWC. 

L.  All enforcement member offers to discontinue the use of the BWC, and the responses thereto, 

shall be recorded by the BWC prior to discontinuing the use of the BWC.  

M.  An arrest or search of a residence or a person(s) is not considered a consensual encounter for the 
purposes of this policy. The BWC shall remain activated until the event is completed in order to 
ensure the integrity of the recording.  

N.  Deliberative process conversations involving law enforcement, which are not participated in by 
citizens, which include but are not limited to discussions on charging decisions, and comparing 
witness accounts, shall not be recorded.  

O.  Whenever the enforcement member believes that a recorded contact may lead to a complaint, 
they shall bring the recording to the attention of their supervisor as soon as practical. If no crime 
report or supplementary report is being prepared, details of the contact may be documented via 
information report or memorandum.  

1.00.4 PROHIBITED USE OF BWC  

A.  BWC’s  shall  not  be  used  for  mass  surveillance  at  public  events  or  to  gather  intelligence 
information related to First Amendment protected speech, associations, or religion, or to record 
activity that is unrelated to a response to a call for service or a law enforcement or investigative 
encounter between an enforcement member and a member of the public.  

B.  Audio or video recording devices shall not be used in Department locker rooms, restrooms or 

any other intimate places where there would be a reasonable expectation of privacy. 

ACLU OF VIRGINIA MODEL BWC POLICY 

C.  Enforcement  members  shall  not  intentionally  record  confidential  informants  or  undercover 
officers  unless  the  recording  is  conducted  specifically  for  the  purpose  of  documenting  an 
operation,  drug  purchase/sale  or  other  undercover  operation  in  furtherance  of  a  criminal 
investigation.  

D.  The  BWC  shall  not  be  activated  while  on  the  grounds  of  any  public,  private  or  parochial 
elementary or secondary school, or inside a medical treatment facility, except for the following 
exceptions: 

1.  during times when all parties being visibly or audibly recorded are in a private room with 

consent for such recording; 

2.  while effecting an arrest; or 

3.  while controlling a person through response to resistance techniques. 

E.  Reporting Requirements  

1.  If  an  enforcement  member  is  suspected  of  wrongdoing  or  involved  in  an  officer-involved 
shooting or other  use of force, the Department expressly prohibits an enforcement member from 
viewing the video file until after they have completed an initial report. In other circumstances, 
although the BWC is not a replacement for written reports, enforcement members may refer to 
the BWC video for exact quotes that were used by the contacted parties.  

2. All  digital  media captured using the  BWC  will be considered property of the Department. 
Accessing,  copying  or  releasing  any  recording  by  any  member  for  other  than  official  law 
enforcement  purposes  is  strictly  prohibited,  except  to  the  extent  disclosure  is  required  or 
authorized  by  the  Virginia  Freedom  of  Information  Act  and  the  release  is  approved  by  the 
appropriate Department official. 

F.  Deletion of Unintentional Recordings 

In the event of an unintentional activation of the BWC system during a non-enforcement or non-
investigative activity, including but not limited to, restroom, meal break, or other areas where a 
reasonable expectation of privacy  exists,   enforcement  members  may  request the recording 
to be deleted. A memorandum detailing the circumstances of the unintentional recording will be 
forwarded  via  the  chain  of  command  to  the  Chief  of  Police.  If  approved,  the  actual  deletion 
requires two-party authorization.   One of those parties will be the Chief of Police or designee 
and the other party will be (Department BWC Administrator).  

1.00.5  BWC DOCUMENTATION 

If an enforcement member fails to activate their BWC, fails to record the entire contact, or interrupts 
the recording, the enforcement member shall document why the recording was not made, interrupted 
or terminated.   

1.00.6 OTHER PHOTO, ELECTRONIC AND RECORDING DEVICES  

A.  Department  members  shall  not  use  a  personal  electronic  recording  or  imaging  device  while 
performing  police  duties  except  in  rare  events  to  record  evidence  when  Departmental  issued 
equipment is not available.  

 

ACLU OF VIRGINIA MODEL BWC POLICY 

B.  All  photographs  containing  any  individually  identifiable  patient  information  are  covered  by 
HIPAA  privacy  laws  and  must  be  protected  in  the  same  manner  as  patient  care  reports  and 
documentation.  

 
C.  Recordings  shall  be  used  for  evidentiary  documentation  or  training  purposes  only,  except  as 
permitted  by  prior  written  approval  by  the  Chief  of  Police  or  designee.  Only  those  members 
acting under their official duties will be permitted access to recordings and/or images.   

 
D.  Department  members  will  not  make  surreptitious  recordings  of  conversations  with  other 
Department  members  except  when  necessary  in  the  course  of  a  criminal  investigation  or  for 
Department administrative investigations. In either case, the Chief of Police or designee will be 
notified prior to for authorization of the nonconsensual recording.  

 
E.  Any on-scene images/recordings and or any other images/recordings taken by members in the 
course  and scope  of their duties  are the  sole property of the Department.  This includes any 
images  taken  intentionally  or  inadvertently  with  a  member’s  personally  owned  camera,  cell 
phone camera, or any other digital imaging device.  The images shall be downloaded as soon as 
feasible and deleted off of the member’s personal device. 

 
F.  No images/recordings taken by any member in the course and scope of their duties may be used, 
printed,  copied,  scanned,  e-mailed,  posted,  shared,  reproduced  or  distributed  in  any  manner, 
unless  for  official  law  enforcement  purposes.  This  prohibition  includes  the  posting  of  any 
Department  photographs  on  personal    Web    sites  including    but  not    limited  to,    Facebook, 
Myspace, YouTube, other public safety agency Web sites, or e-mailing to friends, relatives or 
colleagues without prior approval of the Chief of Police.  

 
G.  All Department digital data will be downloaded as soon as feasible, and will be cataloged and 
stored in a secure database with access limited to appropriate members. After being downloaded, 
digital data on memory cards will be erased, including any member’s personal devices.  

 

1.00.7  AUDITING  
 

A.  BWC will be audited by a designated supervisor on a periodic basis.  Documented audits will be 
completed on the most recently available devices and by selecting downloads at random.  These 
audits will focus on the following areas: 

1.  customer service; 

2.  use of a body microphone; 

3.  training; 

4.  lighting issues (primarily for traffic stops made at night); 

5.  enforcement member’s articulation for the microphone; 

6.  compliance with this policy; 

7.  enforcement member safety issues; and 

8.  any other issue that could result in generating a citizen complaint, a hindrance to prosecution 

or liability for the enforcement member or this Department. 

B.  The designated auditing supervisor shall keep a log documenting findings during BWC device 

ACLU OF VIRGINIA MODEL BWC POLICY 

auditing. 

1.00.8  DATA STORAGE AND RETENTION 

A.  Data  gathered by the  BWC  shall be retained  and  stored by  this Department or  an authorized 
third-party for a minimum of 30 days of the date of the recorded incident (if required by state 
record retention policies) and for up to two (2) years from the date of the recorded incident if 
deemed by the Department to have evidentiary or exculpatory value in a civil action.If the data 
is deemed to have evidentiary or exculpatory value in a criminal action it shall be downloaded 
from  the  server  and  booked  into  evidence  and  retained  as  evidence  as  long  as  required  by 
applicable Virginia law.   

B.  Any  third-parties  acting  as  an  agent  in  maintaining  BWC  footage  shall  not  be  permitted  to 
independently access, view or alter any video footage, except to delete videos as required by law 
or this agency’s retention policies. 

C.  Data gathered by the BWC shall be retained and stored by this Department for a minimum of 
two (2) years from the date of the recorded incident (or longer if required by the state’s record 
retention  policies  governing  evidence  of  a  criminal  act)  if  the  video  footage  captures  images 
involving: 

1.  any use of force; 

2.  events leading up to an including an arrest for a felony-level offense, or events that constitute 

a felony-level offense; or 

3.  an encounter about which a complaint has been registered by a subject of the video footage. 

D.  Data gathered by the BWC shall be retained and stored by this Department for a minimum of 
two (2) years from the date of the recorded incident if a longer retention period is voluntarily 
requested by: 

1.  enforcement  member,  if  the  video  footage  is  being  retained  solely  and  exclusively  for  

Department training purposes; 

2.  any member of the public who is a subject of the video footage; 

3.  any parent or legal guardian of a minor who is the subject of the video footage; or 

4.  a deceased subject person’s next of kin or legally authorized designee. 

E.  Any member of the public, parent or legal guardian of a minor, or a deceased subject’s next of 
kin or legally authorized designee who is a subject of video footage, shall be permitted to review 
that specific video footage in order to make a determination as to whether they will voluntarily 
request it to be subject to a two (2) year retention period. 

F.  Pursuant  to  the  Virginia  Freedom  of  Information  Act  and  its  requirement  that  exceptions  to 
disclosure be construed narrowly, it is the goal of this policy to support and promote openness 
in government by releasing video recordings to the public upon request whenever possible. This 
policy  must  also  ensure  that  the  privacy  of  victims,  witnesses  and  suspects  is  maintained 
whenever  feasible.  BWC  video  footage  shall  not  be  divulged  or  used  for  any  commercial  or 

ACLU OF VIRGINIA MODEL BWC POLICY 

other non-law enforcement purpose. This policy will not affect the release of recordings pursuant 
to a court order or subpoena.  

G.  Nothing  in  this  policy  shall  be  read  to  contravene  any  laws  governing  the  maintenance  and 

destruction of evidence in criminal investigations and prosecutions. 

H.  Data gathered by the BWC may be used and shared with the Commonwealth’s Attorney’s office 

or other law enforcement agencies only as permitted by law.  

1.00.9 REPAIRS, INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE 

 
Enforcement  members  utilizing  a  BWC  will  maintain  the  equipment  per  the  manufacturer’s 
guidelines and inspect the equipment for nonfunctioning or malfunctioning devices before duty and 
immediately  report  any  nonfunctioning  equipment  to  their  supervisor.    The  shift  supervisor  may 
reassign  another  unit  if  audio/video  equipment  has  a  malfunction  provided  a  unit  is  available,  or 
reissue another BWC until repairs or replacement can be made, if available.   
 

1.00.10 TRAINING REQUIREMENTS 

 

Enforcement  members  and  supervisors  will  be  provided  adequate  training  in  the  use  of  BWC 
devices prior to being allowed to use the equipment.  
 

1.00.11 ACCOUNTABILITY AND DISCIPLINE 

All enforcement members are accountable for complying with this policy governing the use of BWC 
devices. Appropriate disciplinary action, up to and including termination, will be taken against any 
enforcement  member  who  is  found  to  have  failed  to  adhere  to  the  recording  or  retention 
requirements  contained  in  this  policy,  to  have  intentionally  interfered  with  a  BWC’s  ability  to 
accurately  capture  video  footage,  or  to  have  engaged  in  any  other  intentional  violation  of  the 
requirements of this policy governing the use of a BWC on or off duty. 

 

