Getting to Win-Win

The Use of Body-Worn 

Cameras in Virginia Policing

Executive Summary

ACLU of Virginia Board of Directors

Executive Committee
Jeff Kerr, President

Jayne Barnard, Immediate Past President

Steve Levinson, Vice President

Libby Witt, Secretary

Sandy Smith, Treasurer

Ed Rosenthal, Legal Panel Chair

Liz Gilchrist, National Board Representative

Patrick Anderson
David Baluarte
Sheyna Burt
Stew Dunn
Howard Gholson
Lavonda Graham-Williams
Vivian Hamilton
Jim Heilman
Greg Hicks
Waldo Jaquith
Victoria Kidd
Kim Lettner

Art Miller
James Morton
John Neal
Aida Pacheco
Ron Passmore
Jerry Peters
Wornie Reed
Alan Rudnick
Jay Sinha
Fay Slotnick
Marion Stillson
Leslie Vandivere

Barbara Ziony

ACLU of Virginia Staff

Claire Guthrie Gastañaga, Executive Director

Elizabeth Wong, Deputy Director

Valerie Jones-Fleming, Office Manager

Rebecca Glenberg, Legal Director
Hope Amezquita, Staff Attorney

Robert Poggenklass, Tony Dunn Legal Fellow

Gail Deady, The Secular Society Women’s Rights Legal Fellow

Samantha Artison, Paralegal

Liz Musselman, Director of Philanthropy

Bill Farrar, APR, Director of Public Policy and Communications

Katherine Greenier, Reproductive Freedom Project Director
Tamara Mason, Fund and Membership Development Assistant

The principal author of this report is Frank Knaack, immediate past Director of Public Policy and 
Communications of the ACLU of Virginia.  ACLU of Virginia intern Jack Lohmann made significant 
contributions to the research and data analysis underlying the findings.  ACLU of Virginia staff mem-
bers Rob Poggenklass, Bill Farrar, Elizabeth Wong, and Claire Guthrie Gastañaga also contributed.  
We were fortunate to have the support and guidance of ACLU national office staff during this project, 
including Jay Stanley and Chad Marlow. 

This report is copyrighted 2015 by the ACLU Foundation of Virginia, Inc. Information from the report 
may be used freely so long as proper attribution is made.

BWCs 

require 

specific, 

As with many technological 
advances in policing, however, 
the deployment of this 
technology without proper 
safeguards and the right 
policies in place can turn a tool 
meant to promote police 
accountability into a tool that 
expands the surveillance state. 

Getting to Win-Win: Executive Summary 
 
Body  worn  cameras  (BWCs)  are  cameras  worn  on 
police officers’ bodies that record audio and video of 
officers’ 
interactions  with  the  public  from  the 
officers’  perspective.  Many  of  the  issues  of  data 
retention  and  access  associated  with  use  of  BWCs 
are  largely  the  same  as  with  dash  cameras,  aerial 
surveillance  video  collected  by  drones,  and  data 
from any other law enforcement deployed recording 
devices. 
special 
consideration, however, because they can be used to 
record  individuals  in  public  and  private  settings 
without  the  individual  or  the  public’s  knowledge.  Moreover,  their  ability  to  provide  the 
“officer’s eye view” of an interaction with a member or members of the public can make the 
data they acquire of particular interest to the public when either the conduct of police or 
community  members  is  in  question.  As  with  many  technological  advances  in  policing, 
however,  the  deployment  of  this  technology  without  proper  safeguards  and  the  right 
policies  in  place  can  turn  a  tool  meant  to  promote  police  accountability  into  a  tool  that 
expands the surveillance state.  
 
On  May  1,  2015,  the  U.S.  Department  of  Justice  announced  the  establishment  of  a  $20 
million  Body-Worn  Cameras  Pilot  Partnership  Program.1  It  followed  the  rush  of 
departments seeking to obtain and deploy BWCs after the shooting death of Michael Brown 
in Ferguson, Missouri.2 Some touted BWCs as the solution to the problem of police violence 
in America.3 While deployment of BWCs will not end police violence, it has the potential to 
help  law  enforcement  departments  become  more  transparent,  accountable,  and  trusted, 
but if, and only if, the right policies are in place to guide deployment.  
 
Virginia has followed the post-Ferguson trend toward increased use of BWCs.4 Indeed, five 
Virginia  localities  (the  cities  of  Newport  News,  Waynesboro,  Lynchburg,  and  Fairfax  and 
Dinwiddie  County)  have  now  received  $500,000  in  grants  under  the  federal  partnership 
program. 
 
Given  the  public  interest  in  assuring  deployment  of  BWCs  serves  both  the  interests  of 
Virginians and the police who serve them, the ACLU of Virginia initiated a project to gather 
and report  to  the  public information  on the  use  of BWCs by law enforcement agencies in 
the  Commonwealth.  That  project  has  now  led  to  the  publication  of  this  report  and 
recommendations regarding the use of BWCs in Virginia.  
 
To  understand  the  use  of  BWCs  in  Virginia,  the  ACLU  of  Virginia  sent  a  Freedom  of 
Information  Act  (FOIA)  request  to  368  local  law  enforcement  agencies  to  collect  existing 
policies for review. We received and reviewed fifty-nine local policies in response to these 
requests.  For  more  information  on  the  methodology  used  to  gather  and  review  the  data, 
please see the Methodology section of this report below.   

 

1 

We  also  reviewed  the  Department  of  Criminal  Justice  Services’  “model”  BWC  Policy 
(developed  with  the  participation  of  law  enforcement  but  no  citizen  stakeholder 
input)(DCJS  BWC  Policy)  that  was  presented  in  draft  form  to  the  Law  Enforcement 
Technology subpanel of the Secure Commonwealth Panel at its meeting on September 15, 
2015. The DCJS BWC Policy is attached to the report as Appendix A. 
 

BWC implementation in 
Virginia is inconsistent at 
best, chaotic at worst. 
There are vast disparities 
from jurisdiction to 
jurisdiction that make it 
difficult, if not impossible, 
for Virginians to know how 
BWCs are being used and 
what their rights are. 

The ACLU of Virginia has determined from the review of 
existing local policies and the “model” proposed by DCJS 
that  BWC  implementation  in  Virginia  is  inconsistent  at 
best,  chaotic  at  worst.  There  are  vast  disparities  from 
jurisdiction  to  jurisdiction  that  make  it  difficult,  if  not 
impossible, for Virginians to know how BWCs are being 
used  and  what  their  rights  are.  Virginians  now  face  a 
bewildering array of policies governing the use of BWCs, 
as well as the retention and disclosure of the personally 
identifiable  data  acquired  through  their  use.  This 
situation  is  further  complicated  by  an  advisory  opinion 
issued  by  the  Virginia  Freedom  of  Information  Act 
Advisory Council on October 2, 2015. The advisory opinion concludes that  FOIA imposes 
different disclosure rules on local police and Sheriffs than apply to other law enforcement 
agencies,  and  it    includes  no  discussion  of  the  possible  interplay  between  FOIA  and  the 
Government  Data  Collection  and  Dissemination  Practices  Act  with  regard  to  law 
enforcement collection and dissemination of personally identifiable information.5  
 
Key  gaps  between  policy  and  principle  identified  in  our  review  that  threaten  individual 
liberty include: 

  Only 3% of BWC policies now in place require officers to inform the public that 
they  are  being  recorded.  The  DCJS  BWC  Policy  only  requires  officers  to  inform 
the public where “practical.” 

  Only 5% of BWC policies now in place require officers to allow a victim of crime 
to decline to be filmed. The DCJS BWC Policy does not require officers to allow a 
victim to decline to be filmed. 

  Only  3%  of  BWC  policies  now  in  place  prohibit  the  use  of  BWC  to  record  First 
Amendment protected activities such as peaceful protests. The DCJS BWC Policy 
does not prohibit filming First Amendment-protected activities. 

  Only  5%  of  BWC  policies  now  in  place  address  BWC  usage  on  school  grounds. 

The DCJS BWC Policy does not address usage of BWCs on school grounds. 

  Only  12%  of  BWC  polices  now  in  place  prohibit  the  use  of  BWCs  in  a  private 
residence if the resident objects. The DCJS BWC Policy does not prohibit use of 
BWCs in a private residence if the resident objects. 

 
To address these gaps and bring uniformity to the implementation of BWCs across Virginia, 
this report sets out arguments in favor of statewide uniformity and recommended policies 
in four key areas. These include: 

 

2 

  Rules  governing  when 

law  enforcement  officers  are  recording  civilian 

encounters and what notice requirements govern their deployment; 

  Rules governing how long data is stored; 
  Rules  and  laws  governing  individual  and  public  access  to  data  collected  by 

BWCs; and 

  Rules  governing  consequences  of  failure  to  comply  with  provisions  of  policies 
assuring transparency and accountability in the use of BWCs, including possible 
decertification as a law enforcement officer. 

 
Proponents of BWCs argue that they can serve as a tool to 
increase  law  enforcement  transparency,  accountability, 
and trust. The ACLU of Virginia believes that the decision 
whether to acquire and deploy BWCs should be made by 
law  enforcement  agencies  with 
local  and  state 
appropriate 
the 
communities  they  serve.  At  the  same  time,  however,  the 
ACLU  of  Virginia  believes  strongly  that  deployment  of 
BWCs can serve the interests of police and the public only 
if proper policies are in place to guide their use. The ACLU of Virginia has advocated before 
the Fairfax County Ad Hoc Police Review Commission and the Law Enforcement Subpanel 
of  the  Secure  Commonwealth  Panel  that  the  following  principles  guide  law  enforcement 
use of BWCs:  

The ACLU of Virginia 
believes strongly that 
deployment of BWCs can 
serve the interests of 
police and the public only 
if proper policies are in 
place to guide their use. 

participation 

input 

and 

from 

  Policies  must  prohibit  use  of  body-worn  cameras  to  gather  information  about 
people surreptitiously. They should not be turned on at public events to surveil 
those in attendance. 
 

  Only officers with arrest authority should be authorized to use BWCs.  

 

  Officers must be required to notify people when the cameras are on and they are 

being recorded.  
 

  Policies should protect the privacy of officers by making clear that cameras are 

only required to be turned on during defined interactions with the public. 
 

  Policies  should  be  explicit  about  when  cameras  are  to  be  turned  on  and  when 
and whether they can be turned off. Officers should have no discretion to deviate 
from departmental policy. 
 

  Policies  should  require  that  every  officer  wearing  cameras  turn  the  recording 
device on at the inception of every law enforcement encounter with a member of 
the  public,  including  stops,  frisks,  searches,  arrests,  consensual  searches  and 
interviews,  enforcement  actions  and  any  encounter 
that  becomes 
confrontational or in any way hostile. 
 

 

3 

  People  who  are  being  filmed  should  have  the  right  to  request  that  BWCs  be 
turned off when the officer is entering their home or business, hospital room or 
other private location or when they are seeking to make an anonymous report of 
a  crime  or  claim  to  be  a  victim  of  crime.  Their  request  should  be  filmed.  In 
addition,  policies  should  include  specific  guidelines  for  recording  juveniles  and 
in schools.  
 

  Strict policies should guide how the recorded information is uploaded from the 

individual camera and stored so that videos cannot be manipulated or erased. 
 

 

  Data  should  be  retained  only  as  long  as  necessary  for  intended  purposes.  It 
should  be  maintained  and  destroyed  pursuant  to  applicable  law  and  record 
retention policies and never by the officer involved in the recording.  
 

  Videos of specific value  should be  “flagged” and retained for as  long  as  needed 
for  personnel  actions  or  criminal  investigations.  Those  with  no  ascertainable 
value should be deleted in accordance with a published schedule except on the 
request  of  a  data  subject.  Flagging  should  occur  automatically  for  incidents 
involving  the  use  of  force,  leading  to  detention,  summons,  or  arrest,  and/or 
resulting in a citizen complaint. 
 

  Policies should provide access to the videos by the people recorded for as long as 
the  videos  are  maintained  by  the  government/law  enforcement.  Properly 
redacted footage should be made available to the public in accordance with well-
defined guidelines, where the public interest would be served by disclosure.  
 

  Failure  to  comply  with  the  policies  governing  use  of  the  cameras  and  videos 

should result in appropriate disciplinary action, including termination. 

As a whole, the 59 local agency 
BWC policies and the DCJS 
BWC Policy that the ACLU of 
Virginia analyzed fail to ensure 
that BWCs are deployed in a 
way that promotes 
transparency, accountability, 
and trust. 

 
Adherence  to  these  principles  is  essential  to  ensure 
that  deployment  of  body  worn  cameras  by  state  or 
local police agencies is truly a win-win for the police 
and the public alike. Unfortunately, our review found 
that  neither  the  local  policies  now  in  place  nor  the 
DCJS BWC Policy comply fully with these principles. 
In addition, in some instances, current FOIA law may 
stand  in  the  way  of  adopting  local  policies  that 
comply with these principles in some instances. 
 

While some individual policies do a better job in addressing some or all of these principles 
than others, as a whole, the 59 local agency BWC policies and the DCJS BWC Policy that the 
ACLU  of  Virginia  analyzed  fail  to  ensure  that  BWCs  are  deployed  in  a  way  that  promotes 
transparency,  accountability,  and  trust.  The  policies  often  do  not  articulate  clearly  what 
actions and events should be filmed, and they miss the mark when it comes to protecting 
the  privacy  of  individuals  in  sensitive  situations.  They  do  not  properly  safeguard  footage 

 

4 

from inappropriate sharing.  They fail to provide ordinary citizens the access to  their own 
data to which they are entitled. Finally, they lack mechanisms to hold officers accountable 
for intentionally or unintentionally violating policy.  
 
To  help  solve  these  problems,  the  ACLU  of  Virginia  developed  its  own  Model  Body  Worn 
Camera Policy that includes the elements we believe are essential to getting to “win-win,” 
that  is,  ensuring  that  use  of  BWCs  serves  the  interest  of  both  law  enforcement  and  the 
public protecting liberty and privacy as  well as assuring accountability and transparency. 
The  ACLU  Model  Policy  is  attached  to  the  report  as  Appendix  B.  We  recognize  that 
implementing  our  Model  policy  and  getting  to  win-win  may  require  changes  in  FOIA  and 
the  Government  Data  Collection  and  Dissemination  Practices  Act  and  adoption  of  laws 
requiring  statewide  uniformity  on  certain  policy  elements  to  best  protect  individual 
privacy and the public’s right to know. Nonetheless, we believe that Virginia can only get to 
“win-win”  in  the  use  of  BWCs  if  these  changes  are  made  and  uniform  policies  adopted 
statewide.  
 
                                                           
1 Justice Department Announces $20 Million in Funding to Support Body-Worn Camera Pilot Program, 
Department of Justice, May 1, 2015 available at http://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/justice-department-
announces-20-million-funding-support-body-worn-camera-pilot-program.  
2 Alan Gomez, Ferguson, police rush to buy body cameras, USA Today, Oct. 11, 2014, available at 
http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2014/10/11/police-body-cameras-ferguson-privacy-
concerns/16587679/.  
3 Michael McAuliffe, Police Body Cameras Seen As A Fix For Ferguson-Style Killings, Huffington Post, 
Nov. 25, 2014, available at http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/11/25/ferguson-body-
cameras_n_6221558.html.  
4 Nick Ochsner, Who's watching you? Police struggle to pay for more cameras, 13News Now, Feb. 9, 2015, 
available at http://www.13newsnow.com/story/news/local/13news-now-investigates/2015/02/09/more-
police-cameras/23134669/.  
5 See Virginia Freedom on Information Advisory Council advisory opinion issued to Sterling E. Rives, III, Hanover 
County Attorney, on October 2, 2015 available online at http://foiacouncil.dls.virginia.gov/ops/welcome.htm 

 

5 

