FERRUM COLLEGE POLICE 
DEPARTMENT 

Operational Directive:  2-16.5 

Subject:   Body Worn Cameras  

Review Date:  4/8/15 

Effective Date:   April 8, 2015 

Approved:______________________ 

Chief JF Owens                

Amends/Supersedes:  N/A 

 

 
 
 
 
NOTE: 
 
This policy is for Departmental use only and shall not apply in any criminal or civil 
proceedings. The Department policy should not be construed as a creation of a higher 
legal standard of safety or care in an evidentiary sense with respect to third party 
claims.  Violations of this Directive will be basis for Departmental administrative 
sanctions.  Violations of law will form the basis for civil and criminal sanctions in a 
recognized judicial setting.   
 
I. 
 

PURPOSE 

To establish procedures and guidelines for the operation, maintenance and/or 
special utilization of the portable hard drive equipment body worn cameras 
(BWC) by sworn officers.   

 
II. 
 
 

PROCEDURE 

A. 

At the start of each shift officers’ will power up BWC to insure it is 
functional. If the BWC is not operational the officer will immediately notify 
a supervisor so it can be replaced. Supervisors will periodically check the 
operational readiness of the BWC as part of their line inspection process. 
Non-operational equipment will be noted and sent for repair as soon as 
possible. 

 
 

B. 

The BWC will be utilized by officers as an evidentiary aid to document any 
conduct or traffic and/or crime scene situation where the BWC would be 
useful in court, civil litigation or the resolution of a citizen complaint. The 
electronic media storage capacity for the BWC is 32GB. The BWC are to 
be turned on during all calls for service and law enforcement-related 
encounters and activities. Only deactivate the BWC at the conclusion of 
the event or with supervisor approval. BWC may also be deactivated at 
the request, when interviewing victims, witnesses or obtaining information 
from persons who wish to remain anonymous.  

                      ** If the BWC is deactivated for any reason by the officer this reason 
will be noted on the recording before it is turned off and documented 
in the report.  
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

C. 

The BWC will be utilized by officers only for its intended purpose in 
the performance of their official duties and in accordance with 
established Department policies.  The unauthorized use, tampering, 
editing of Department BWC or BWC recordings and/or audio tapes 
will result in discipline up to and including termination.  

D. 

The following are required uses when an officer is issued a BWC: 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

   

 

 

 

 

 

Interacting with a visibly intoxicated person(s) 

Interacting with a Person(s) who are using abusive or profane 
language. 

Interacting where a person(s) is acting aggressively or abusive 
towards the officer or others. 

Handling a situation where there is disorderly conduct. 

Conducting a field interview with suspicious person or trespasser 

When it appears that a physical arrest may have to be made. 

Conducting a lawful search subsequent to a violation of law. 

Responding to a serious emergency or crisis situation that should 
be documented. 

9 

All traffic stops 

 

 

E. 

Video/DVD/Portable Hard Drive and BWC Security and Access 

 

1. 

The BWC will utilize Department issued electronic media.  Each 
electronic media will be assigned a specific control number that 
will correspond with the Video/DVD/Portable Hard Drive log sheet. 
Each BWC will be assigned a specific officer that will correspond 
with the BWC Log Sheet. 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

The Video/DVD/Portable Hard Drive Log Sheet and the BWC Log 
Sheet will be utilized to document the location of each BWC placed 
into service or removed from service.  The following items will be 
recorded on the Video/DVD/Portable Hard Drive Log Sheet and 
BWC Log Sheet: 

Supervisors issued BWC for assignment to officers  

The officer assigned the BWC;  

The date the BWC is placed in service or the date and the 
officers’ name who is issued a BWC; 

The date the BWC is removed from service; 

The reason for the replacement of the BWC and a brief 
description leading to the replacement;  

a. 

b. 

c. 

d. 

e. 

 

2. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

F. 

Responsibility and Chain of Custody 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

All personnel will assure that the chain of custody associated with 
BWC is maintained. 

Shift supervisors will be accountable for the completeness of the 
BWC log sheets and security of the electronic media file. 

Supervisors will be responsible for ensuring that all officers are 
instructed in the proper operation of the BWC.  

BWC may be reviewed by a supervisor to ensure that Department 
procedures are being followed. 

Officers can, for report writing purposes, review the electronic 
media in the BWC. 

Officers can, for report writing purposes in the presence of a 
supervisor, review BWC that has been removed from a DVD/CD 
copy made from electronic media that has been removed from a 
BWC. 

G. 

Electronic Media Storage and Retention 

 

1. 

BWC containing information that may be of value for case 
prosecution, a special report or in any criminal or civil adversarial 
proceeding will be safeguarded as other forms of evidence 
pursuant to Operational Directive 2-15 / 2-16. Electronic media will 
be removed by a supervisor who will make a copy of the required 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

 

 

 

 

 

7. 

 

8. 

 

 

data on a DVD/CD.  The electronic media will then be placed back 
in the portable hard drive deck. 

The DVD/CD copy made by the supervisor will serve as the original 
and will be placed in an envelope with all required information 
completed. The supervisor will then submit the DVD/CD copy to the 
property room.  Evidence control procedures will be followed 
pursuant to Operational Directive 2-15 / 2-16. 

The BWC will be downloaded to an external hard drive by a 
supervisor once a week or as needed. The external hard drive is 
located in the supervisor’s office. Supervisors downloading data to 
the external hard drive will comply with all requirements of 
Operational Directive 2-15 / 2-16. 

The storage will be set to delete data based on the designation 
assigned to the data. Non-evidentiary electronic media files stored 
for the 90 day time period will be deleted. Evidential data will be 
stored for 90 days past appeal deadline dates before being 
deleted. 

Once the BWC is downloaded to the external hard drive the BWC 
will be placed back in service. 

No electronic media DVD/CD will be released to non-supervisory 
personnel or another criminal justice agency or organization for trial 
without an order of discovery request from the Commonwealth 
Attorney or other reasons without prior approval from the Chief or 
his designee.  If approved, only a duplicate copy is to be released 
and the original is to be retained in the Property Room.  No 
information contained on any DVD/CD will be released to any other 
person absent the prior approval of the Chief, his designee or 
mandated legal request. 

Electronic media or BWC data not required to support known 
investigations, litigation, scheduled court proceedings or other legal 
uses will be maintained for a minimum period of 90 days. At the 
end of 90 day period the supervisor will be responsible for ensuring 
the erasing of the BWC recordings has occurred automatically by 
the system. 

At no time will an officer remove or download any part of the 
electronic media stored in the BWC removable media. Only a 
supervisor is authorized to remove or download any part of 
the electronic media from the BWC electronic media.  The 
supervisor will log each time any part of the electronic media 
is removed or downloaded from a BWC. 

 
 
 

 

 

