I

r

*..

(‘I

1

r

D .

1’. “1) uclc” Ad ai us, SI wri II

Diii nC I( lie ( ni titv SI ic ii Ii’s ( ) 111cc

P.O. Box 120

Diiiwiddie, Virginia 23811

801—169— L5S()

June 24. 2015

ACLU of Virginia
701 F Franklin Street
Suite 1412
Richmond. Virginia 23219

Dear Mr. knaack,

In response to your Virginia Freedom of lnfomation Act request dated June 12.
2015. Dinwiddie County Sherifrs Office only has one body worn camera. The camera is
the Axon body camera manufactured by Taser. The data storage is cloud based
application through Evidenee.corn . The body camera is being used on a trial basis to
determine if there is a need for additional cameras in our agency.

I have included a copy of the policy that we have implemented for the officer who

is assigned this one camera.

If there is anything else that you need please feel free to contact me at 804-469-

4550.

Sincerely.

W. B. knott
Major

I. POLICY:

It shall be the policy of the Dinwiddie County Sheriffs Office to utilize Body-Worn

Camera (BWC) equipment to assist Sheriffs Office personnel in the performance of

their duties by providing an accurate and unbiased recorded event of an incident.

Additionally. to maximize effectiveness of the BWC and maintain integrity of

evidence and related documentation, all personnel utilizing these devices will adhere

to the procedures outlined within this policy. The wearing of a BWC by an assigned

deputy is mandatory and non-compliance with this order could result in disciplinary

action.

II. PURPOSE:

The purpose of this policy is to provide guidance on the proper use of the Body-Worn

Camera (BWC) and the proper storage of data retrieved by the use of this equipment.

III. DEFINITIONS:

Body-Worn Camera (BWC): A recording system that captures audio and video

that is individually worn by and includes, at a minimum, a camera and

recorder.

Buffering: The thirty seconds of video prior to activation of the BWC event mode held

in temporary storage.

Evidence Transfer Station: A docking station that recharges the Axon Tactical

Computer (ATC) while uploading to Evidence.com all data captured from the BWC

operator’s point of view during the operator’s shift.

Evidence.com: The online web-based digital media storage facility accessed at

www.evidence.com. The virtual warehouse stores digitally-encrypted data

(photographs. audio and video recordings) in a highly-secure environment.

System Administrator: Officer(s) appointed by the Sheriff with full

administrator rights who assigns and tracks equipment, controls passwords,

acts as liaison with laser Axon representatives and is the Sheriffs Office subject

matter expert on body-worn devices.

IV. PROCEDURES - BODY-WORN CAMERA SYSTEM:

Deputies assigned a BWC shall don a fully-charged system prior to their tour of duty.

In order to best capture that which is observed by an deputy using a BWC. the

camera should be located on the head or shoulder area of the deputy. Deputies shall

activate the BWC whenever there is a potential for dealing with a suspect ofa

crime. This would include, but is not limited to. traffic stops. suspicious person

contacts. or calls for service. The BWC may also be activated whenever the deputy

feels its use would be beneficial to his/her sheriffs office duties. Once the camera is

activated to the event” mode. it shall remain on until the deputy’s action is complete.

An officer who is lawfully present in an area protected by the Fourth Amendment

shall activate the BWC when there is reasonable suspicion that a crime is being

committed, has been committed, or is about to be committed, or that evidence of a

crime is present. In the absence of such criteria, the officer must turn ofl’ the BWC if

asked to do so by a person with apparent authority over the constitutionally protected

area. As a reminder, entry into a Fourth Amendment protected area

requires probable cause and a warrant or warrant exception. (cx. Magistrates

Office/Judges Chambers/Clerk of Courts Office/Medical Facility)

Inspections and maintenance of the BWC shall be the responsibility of the assigned

deputy. Only authorized personnel to whom a recording system is assigned may

use, touch or handle that recording system. Unauthorized personnel shall not use.

touch or handle any recording system.

At the end ofa deputy’s tour of duty. the recording system will be placed into the

assigned docking station slot on the Evidence Transfer Station located in its prescribed

location at Dinwiddie County Sheriffs Office. The recording system should not he

removed from the Evidence Transfer Station until all of the data has been uploaded and

the battery has been fully charged. Any functionality or serviceability problems shall be

reported to their supervisor immediately, who will then notify the System Administrator.

At the end of the deputy’s tour, he or she will mark any video related to a criminal or

traffic case, or that may be useful to the Sheriffs Office for training purposes. (This

includes arrests/search warrants/traffic stops conducted by other officers). When marking

video, the officer will ensure that the appropriate category is selected. The categories are

Evidentiary. Non-Evidentiaiy or Training/Demo. All Evidentian cases must include the

case number as the Video ID. Non-Evidentiary cases should include at a minimum a brief

description of the incident and/or a case number. Once a deputy determines that

Evidentiary video is no longer needed. (i.e. adjudicated in court) the deputy will re

categorize that particular video to either Non-Evidentiary or Training/Demo in order to

purge video that is no longer needed.

V. DOCUMENTATION:

Deputies will document the use of any video recording system in reports. citations.

affidavits. field interviews. etc. Bef re writing reports involving the response to

resistance, critical incidents, confessions or admissions, officers will review any

video. Officers are encouraged to review available video while preparing written

reports to ensure accuracy.

Note: The BWC records at a level beyond human ocular capability.

VI. RESTRICTIONS:

The following uses of’ Body worn recording syslems are strictly prohibited

I. Video-recording undercover officers or confidential informants.

2. Duplicating or distributing recordings for other than official law enforcement

purposes.

3. Permitting citizens to review recordings for other than official law

enforcement purposes.

4. Altering captured data.

5. Accessing recordings for other than case-related purposes. responses to

resistance, formal or informal complaints, legal review, pursuant to

established policy or as directed by the Sheriff’ or designee.

6. Making or creating. by separate device or otherwise, a copy of any recording

except as directed by the Sheri l’f or designee.

7. Posting to social media sites without approval by the Sheriff of Dinwiddie County.

VII. SYSTEM ADMINISTRATOR:

The Mobile Video System Administrator is responsible for overall maintenance,

management. training and retention, and acts as a liaison between the Department

and Taser. The System Administrator reports to the Sheriff or his designee.

VIII. CONFIDENTIALITY:

All recording media. images. and audio are property of the Dinwiddie County Sheriff’s

Office and will not he copied. released, or disseminated in any form or manner outside

the parameters of this policy without the expressed written consent of the Sheriff or his
designee. Under no circumstances will any employee of the Dinwiddie County Sheriff’s

Office make a personal copy of any recorded event without prior written permission from

the Sheriff or his designee.

IX. RETENTION:

Videos that are categorized as Evidentiary or Training/Demo will be maintained

until they no longer serve a law enforcement purpose. After which videos will be

re-categorized by the officer or System Administrator as Non-Evidentiary and

purged from the system. Non-Evidentiary videos will he purged from the system no

later than 90 days from their upload or re-categorization. Videos maintained in the

system that have not been categorized will be purged from the system no later

thanl8O days from their upload.

X. VIDEO SHARENC:

At times, deputies ‘viii be asked to share video evidence that the’ have collected

with outside agencies such as the Commonwealth Attorney’s Office. Officers are

permitted to share with the Commonwealth Attorney’s Office as well as any

Federal. State or Local agency that is in need of the video for a law enforcement

purpose for a duration that satisfies that purpose. Additionally, deputies are

permitted to allow that evidence to be downloaded by the requesting agency for

their law enforcement purpose if necessary. Any other request for video, either

Evidentiary. Non-Evidentiary or Training/Demo, shall be approved in writing by the

Sheriff’or his designee prior to release.

XI.TRAININC:

Officers shall be trained and receive instruction prior to being assigned a BWC.

