WEST POINT  POLICE DEPARTMENT

SUBJECT: BODY WORN  CAMERAS
EFFECTM DATE: 312412015

AMENDS/SUPERSEDES:

VLEPSC STANDARDS:
OPR.O1.11

GEIIERAL  ORDERS

FIII]MBERI 2-56
REVIEWDATE: ANNUALLY

NOTE:

This rule or regulation is for intemal use only,  and does not enlarge an officer's
civil or criminil liability, in any way. It should not be construed as the creation  of
a higher standard  ofsafety or care in an evidentiary  sense, with respect to third
party claims. Violatio.r,  of thir directive, if proven,  can only form the basis of a
complaint by this agency, and then, only in a non-judicial  administrative setting'

INDEX  WORDS:

Equipment
BWC
Body Wom Camera

I.

il.

POLICY:
It is the policy of the Town of west Point  Police Department  that officers  assigned  a
shall activate the assigned  BWC  when  such use is appropriate
body worn "i^"ru(BWC) 
to the proper performance  of his or her official duties, where the recordings  are consistent
*irt ,tri, policy and law. This policy does not govern the use of surreptitious  recording
devices  used in undercover  operations'

PURPOSE:
This policy is intended to provide officers with instructions on when  and how to use
BWC's  so that officers may reliably  record their contacts  with the public  in accordance
with the law.

IIr.

PROCEDURES:

A.

Administration:

This agency  has adopted  the use of the BWC  to accomplish  several  objectives'
The primary  objectives  are as follows:
1. 

BWC's allow  for accurate  documentation  of law-enforcement-citizet
contact, arrests, and critical incidents. They also serve to enhance the
accuracy of officer  reports and testimony in court'
Audio and video  recordings  also enhance this agency's  abiiity to review
probable cause for arrest,  offi"",  and suspect interaction, and evidence for
investigative and prosecutorial  purposes  and to provide additional
information  for officer evaluation  and training'
The BWC may also be useful  in documenting  crime or crash  scenes  or
other events that include the confiscation and documentation  of evidence
or contraband.

2. 

3. 

When  and how to use the BWC:
1. 

officers shall wear the BWC when in uniform and on duty. The BWC
shall be affixed to the uniform  in accordance  with the manufacturer's
instructions.

Z.  Officers  shall activate the BWC  to record all contacts  with citizens  in the

performance  of official duties'
If an officer fails to activate the BWC,  fails to record the entire contact, or
intemrpts the recording,  the officer shall document why a recording  was
not made, was intemrpted, or was terminated'

Civilians shall not be allowed  to review the recordings  at the scene'

Procedures  for BWC use:
1. 

BWC equipment  is issued primarily to uniformed  personnel as authorized
bythisug.','y.officers*hou'.assignedBwCequipmentmustusethe
equipment.rrrl.s  otherwise  authorized  by the chief or his designee'
officers  shall use only BWCs issued by the Town of west Point  Police
Department.  The gWC equipment  and all data' images' video'.and
metadata  captured,.""o,d"d,  or otherwise  produced by the equipment  is
the soie property of the Town of west Point Police  Department.

B.

C.

3. 

4. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

1 . 

8. 

g. 

officers  who are assigned  BWCs must complete  an agency  approved
andlorprovided training  program  to ensure proper use and operations.
Additional training -uy U" required  at periodic  intervals  to ensure the
continued  effectivi use and operation  of the equipment,  proper calibration
and performance,  and to incorporate  changes, updates,  or other revisions
in policy and equiPment
BWC equipment  is the responsibility  of individual officers and will be
used with reasonable  care  to ensure proper  functioning.  Equipment
malfunctions shall be brought  to the attention  of a supervisor  as soon as
possible  so the affected BWC may be repaired in a timely mannel  andlor a
replacement unit maY  be issued.

Officers  shall inspect and test the BWC prior to each shift in order to
verify proper  functioning  and notiff the duty supervisor  of any problems'

officers shall not edit,  alter erase,  duplicate,  coPY, share, or otherwise
distribute in any manner BWC  recordings  without  prior  permission  from
the Chief or his designee. The addition of metadata, such as Incident
number,  may beadded in accordance  with ttaintng  and manufacturef's
instructions.
officers  are encouraged  to inform  their  supervisors of any recordings  that
may be of value for training purposes'
If an officer is suspected of wrongdoing  or involved  in an officer involved
shooting  or other serious  use of force, the agency  reserves the right to limit
or restrict an officer from viewing  the video file'
Requests  for deletion  of portions of the recordings  (e.g., in the event of a
personal recording)  *rrib" submitted  in writing  and approved by the
Chief or his desig[ee  in accordance  with Virginia  record retention  laws'
All requests  and final decisions  shall be kept  on file'

10.  Officers  shaii note in incident, arrest  and other related reports when
recordings  were made  during the incident in question' If an incident did
not require  a written  report,  the officer shall have  dispatch note in the
dispatchnotesthatanwcrecordingwasmade.However,BwC
recordings  are not a replacement for written  reports'

D.

Restrictions  on using the BWC:
BWCs shall be used only in conjunction with offrcial law enforcement  duties'
The BWC shall not generaily  be used to record:

1.

2.

1J.

4.

Communications  with other law enforcement  personnel without  the
permission  of the Chief

Encounters with undercover  officers or confidential  informants.

When  on break or otherwise  engaged in personal activities.

In any location where individuals  have  a reasonable  expectation  of
pivacy,  such as a locker room or restroom.

E.

Storage:
1.  All BWCs  shall be placed in the charging  dock  at the end of each shift.

This allows for the upload  of all recordings  made  during  the previous shift
and charging  of the internal  battery. Each file shall contain  information
related to the date, incident number, BWC identifier and assigned  officer'

2. 

3. 

4. 

A11 images  and  sound recorded by the BWC are the exclusive  property of
this agency. Accessing,  copying, or releasing  files for non-law
enforcement purposes  is strictly  prohibited.

Files will be securely stored  and in accordance  with Virginia  record
retention  laws and no longer  than for a useful  purpose s of training  or for
use in an investigation or prosecution.  In capital  punishment  prosecutions,
recordings  shal te kept until the offender  is no longer  under  the control of
a criminal justice  agency.

Officers will notifu  the BWC administrators  as soon as practical, in
writing, preferably email, of a taped  incident that has evidentiary value'
The BWC administrator will change the status of the recorded incident in
the storage  system,  thereby  lengthening  the retention  time for the
recording  of criminal  related incidents.

F:

Supervisory  ResponsibilitY:

1. 

2. 

Supervisory  personnel shall  ensure that officers  equipped with BWC
devices  utiliie them in accordance  with policy and procedures  defined
herein.

At least on a monthly basis, supervisors will randomly review BWC
recordings  to ensure that the equipment  is operating  properly and that
officers are using the devices appropriately and in accordance  with policy
and to identifu any areas  in which  additional training  or guidance is
required.

