Digital In-Car Camera’s and 

VIEVU Wearable Video Camera System 

Massanutten Police Department 
Rights and Responsibilities Manual 

Subject:  

Effective Date: 
Updated: 
Approved: 

Digital In-Car Cameras
VIEVU Wearable Video Camera System 
March 1, 2007 
May 1, 2009 (reviewed by counsel: September 30, 2014) 
Chief J.S. Gordon, Jr. 

Section:  2-40 

POLICY 

Police Officers of the Massanutten Police Department are often put in difficult 
and/or compromising situations. The MPD is always looking for ways to better protect 
itself, the Officers and the MPOA through the use of new technology and equipment. 
Digital in-car cameras and or other video systems such as the VIEVU Wearable Video 
Cameras have been obtained and are in use to help serve the MPD, it’s Officers, the 
MPOA and the community.   

This policy provides a reference source for the digital in-car cameras and the 

Vievu wearable video camera. It is intended to aid in the coordination of 
interdepartmental activity and provide a basis for uniformity. 

This policy is designed to offer guidance in the form of set procedures in the 

operational and managerial functions. 

2-40.1   

General Orders 

Digital In-Car Camera’s and 

VIEVU Wearable Video Camera System 

I. 

PURPOSE: 

The purpose of this general order is to establish guidelines and 

procedures that Massanutten Police Officers must follow while using the 
digital in-car camera systems and VIEVU Video Camera systems.   

II.

PROCEDURES-GENERAL:

A.  General Patrol 

1.

2.

If directed, the officers will while on patrol keep their digital
in-car camera systems on and recording at all times.
Officers will always use their digital in-car camera system
and the VIEVU system when conducting investigations
and/or interviews with suspects, victims and etc unless there
are legal exceptions.

B.  General Operational Considerations 

1.

2.

Officers will be vigilant in remembering to cut both of their
camera systems on when in contact, interviewing,
interrogating etc individuals.
Officers will be responsible for making sure the camera
systems are working properly at the beginning and end of
their respective shifts. If any problems are noted then the
Officer(s) will report those problems to the Chief of Police or
his designee in a timely manner and document the
information.

2-40.2   

General Orders 

Digital In-Car Camera’s and 

VIEVU Wearable Video Camera System 

 

 
 
 
 
 

1. 

C.  Non Use of Digital In-Car Camera System and or the VIEVU system 
 

If any Officer during the course of duty has an incident arise 
and the digital in-car camera system and or the VIEVU 
camera system was working properly and was not utilized the 
Officer(s) may face disciplinary action by the Chief of 
Police.   
The Officer(s) will in a timely fashion notify the Chief of 
Police or his designee of any digital in-car camera system 
and or the VIEVU system that was malfunctioning before, 
during or after any incident. 
If any digital in-car camera system and or the VIEVU camera 
system was reported to be malfunctioning and it is found that 
the system was working properly but, was just not utilized 
the Officer(s) will face disciplinary action by the Chief of 
Police.  

2. 

3. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2-40.3 

           General Orders 

 

