TYPE OF DIRECTIVE   
LINE PROCEDURE 
SUBJECT 
BODY WORN CAMERAS 
REFERENCE 
LP-61 

 

NUMBER   
LP-04-15 REV. 
EFFECTIVE DATE 
04/10/15 
RESCINDS 
LP-04-15 

PURPOSE 
 
To establish procedures related to the use of a Body Worn Camera (BWC) and the management,  
storage, and retrieval of BWC recordings. 
 
POLICY 
 
The Body Worn Camera (BWC) is an audio and video recording system worn by officers and serves as 
an additional means of documenting incidents encountered by the officer in the course of his public 
safety duties. When activating a BWC, officers shall consider both the needs of public safety as well as 
the privacy and constitutional rights of individual citizens. 
 
REGULATION 
 
The Division will issue BWCs to only those officers who have been properly trained on their operation 
and  the  applicable  policies  governing  their  use.    Officers  are  permitted  to  use  only  Division-issued 
BWCs to capture “point of view” audio and video recordings. 
 
PROCEDURES 
 
I. 
 
 

Officers assigned a BWC shall wear them while working in uniform, in both on-duty and 
off-duty capacities. 

UNIFORM AND MAINTENANCE  

Officers  shall  wear  the  BWC  on  their  strong  (gun  hand)  side  mounted  in  one  of  the 
Division-approved  methods,  utilizing  only  the  mounting  options  provided  by  the 
manufacturer.  Officers are responsible for ensuring the BWC remains in a position that 
allows the BWC to record an encounter from the officer’s “point of view.” 

A. 

B. 

C. 

 
 

 
 

 
II. 
 
 

 

Officers  are  responsible  for  the  use  and  maintenance  of  the  BWC  and  bring  apparent 
problems with the equipment to the attention of a supervisor immediately.  Officers shall 
not attempt to fix a BWC suspected of malfunctioning. 

 
ACTIVATION 
 
A.  When reasonable, practicable, and safe to do so, officers should advise citizens that the 

encounter is being recorded by a BWC. 

B.   

The BWC shall be activated when an officer’s contact with a citizen involves actual or 
potential violations of law, actual or potential suspect(s), or actual or potential verbally or 
physically aggressive behavior.  Examples of circumstances when the BWC shall be used 
include, but are not limited to, the following: 

LP-04-15 REV. BODY WORN CAMERAS 

 

Traffic stops; 
Calls involving suspicious vehicles or person; 
Arrests; and/or 
Calls involving mental health consumers. 

 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
 
If  not  already  activated,  the  BWC  shall  be  activated  to  record  any  encounter 
that becomes adversarial after initial contact or in  any situation that the officer 
believes its  use would be appropriate to  document the encounter. 

Once the BWC is activated, it shall remain activated until: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

The conclusion of the officer’s involvement in that event; 

The  event  becomes  predominately  investigative  in  nature  (for  example,  the 
incident has transitioned from an initial or tactical response into a controlled and 
orderly investigation);  

An officer reasonably believes that doing so will not result in the loss of critical 
documentary information; or  

When directed to do so by a supervisor. 

 
 
 
 
 
C. 

D. 
 
 

 

 

 

RESTRICTIONS 

A. 

B. 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
C. 

BWCs shall be used only for a legitimate law enforcement purposes. 

BWCs shall not be used in the following situations: 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

To  record  county  employees,  including  other  Division  members,  unless  taking 
law enforcement action consistent with Section II; 

To record events in bathrooms, locker rooms, or other places where there is an 
expectation of privacy unless taking law enforcement action; 

While interacting with known confidential informants or undercover officers.  In 
situations where the recording is of evidentiary value, an officer may position the 
BWC in a manner to capture an audio recording of the event but not to record 
video of the informant or undercover officer; 

To record personal activity; 

During tactical planning discussions; and/or 

In court, officers shall leave the BWC in their vehicle. 

Unless  otherwise  required  by  Section  II,  officers  should  not  use  a  BWC  to  record  an 
encounter with a citizen that is non-confrontational and routine unless an officer has an 
articulable reason for activating the BWC during that encounter.   

Page 2 of 4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
III. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 
 
IV. 
 
 

 
V. 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 

LP-04-15 REV. BODY WORN CAMERAS 

 

EVIDENCE 
 
A. 

A BWC’s audio and video recordings are treated as evidence in a criminal investigation 
and  shall  not  be  disseminated  outside  of  the  Division,  County  Attorney’s  Office,  or 
Commonwealth Attorney’s Office without prior approval by the Chief of Police or his 
designee. 

No officer shall attempt to erase, edit or otherwise alter any data captured by a BWC. 

B. 
 
ACCESS AND RETENTION 

A. 

B. 

C. 

 

The  Body  Worn  Camera  (BWC)  and  all  video  files  are  the  property  of  the  Henrico 
County Police Division and are to be used for official purposes only. 

All BWC recordings shall be uploaded to Evidence.com.  Docking stations are located 
in each of the three Patrol Stations.  Officers shall upload all BWC recordings prior to 
their next tour of duty utilizing the docking stations, ideally leaving the camera docked 
between shifts.  The docking station will automatically upload all data.   

All  uploaded  BWC  recordings  shall  be  classified  as  either  “Evidentiary”  or 
“Uncategorized.”    

1. 

 
2. 

“Evidentiary” Recording - Contain documentation that can be used in a criminal 
investigation  or  captures  a  confrontational  encounter  between  an  officer  and  a 
citizen. “Evidentiary” video will be tagged with the corresponding ICR or CAD 
number  in  the  ID  field  and  the  category  set  as  “Evidentiary”  once  uploaded  to 
Evidence.com in the below format. 

 
ID example for the ICR#: 150309999 
ID example for the CAD#:  C9999 or M9999 

 
“Uncategorized”  Recording-  Does  not  contain  documentation  to  be  used  as 
evidence and captures a routine or non-confrontational encounter. 

D. 

Unless  transferred  to  Division  databases  under  Section  V.E.,  the  retention  period  by 
Evidence.com for BWC recordings shall be as follows: 

1. 
 
2. 

“ Uncategorized” recordings will be retained by Evidence.com for 90-days.   

“Evidentiary” recordings will be retained by Evidence.com for 180 days.   

E. 

Transfer to ADAMS or other Division [databases]. 

1. 

 
2. 

Any “Evidentiary” recording needed beyond 180 days for the prosecution of a 
criminal or traffic case shall be transferred into ADAMS by the officer whose 
BWC captured the recording in accordance with LP-61. 

All BWC recordings associated with a response to resistance shall be transferred 

Page 3 of 4 

LP-04-15 REV. BODY WORN CAMERAS 

 

into ADAMS upon receipt of a HCPD-340, Response to Resistance After-Action 
Report, by the Commander, Quality Assurance. 

3. 

All  BWC  recordings  associated  with  any  Internal  Affairs  investigation  or 
complaint shall be tagged as “Evidentiary” and transferred into IAPro by Internal 
Affairs.  

Access  to  Recordings:    Whether  stored  in  Evidence.com,  ADAMS  or  other  Division 
databases, access to BWC recordings is limited to law enforcement or other Division- 
approved  purposes  only.    Review  of  any  BWC  recording  shall  be  performed  only  on 
Division equipment.  Officers shall not: 

View any BWC recording for anything other than approved Division purposes; 

Copy, download or convert any BWC recording for any type of personal use; or 

Sync personal devices to save BWC recordings. 

 1. 
 
2. 
 
3. 
 

Upon receiving notification of any damage or malfunction of a BWC, the supervisor will 
remove the BWC from service and send an email to the BWC email group at  
bwc@pdredmine.henrico.us.   

Supervisors shall review BWC recordings relating to an incident for which a Response 
to Resistance After-Action Report (HCPD-340) was completed by an officer. 

The  Commander,  Quality  Assurance  shall  periodically  conduct  a  random  review  of 
BWC recordings to assess the overall performance of the BWC equipment. 

 
 

 

 
 

VI. 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 

F. 

 

A. 

 

B. 

C. 

  

 
 
 
By Order of: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

SUPERVISOR RESPONSIBILITIES 

Douglas A. Middleton 
Chief of Police 

 

Page 4 of 4 

