Frederick County Sheriff’s Office 
NOTE: This directive is for internal use only, and does not enlarge an 
employee’s civil liability in any way. It should not be constructed as the creation 
of a higher standard of safety or care in an evidentiary sense, with respect to 
third party claims. Violation of this directive, if proven, can only form the basis 
of a complaint by this department, and then only in a non-judicial administrative 
setting 

Series 
OPR 

 
Number 
326 

Effective Date 
8-1-2011 

Review Date 
1-1-2016 

Reviewing Office 

Sheriff 

 

Subject 
Mobile Video/Audio Recording Equipment 

References 
OPR.01.01 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

   

   

   

 
 
 

 

New Order 
 
Amends 
 
Replaces 
 
 
 

 

 
 
I. 
 

 
II. 
 

 
III. 
 
 
 

 

Sheriff 

06/05/2014 

Date 

PURPOSE 
 
The purpose of this policy is to establish guidelines for the use of in car 
video/audio recording systems and recording systems worn by the deputy on his 
uniform for the Frederick County Sheriff’s Office. 

POLICY 
 
Mobile video/audio recording equipment has been demonstrated to be of value 
in collecting visual and audible evidence to expedite the prosecution and 
adjudication of criminal/traffic cases, as well as to promote deputy safety, 
provide corroboration of the deputy’s testimony, and to be an eyewitness to 
events as they occur.  In order to maximize the effectiveness of this equipment 
in these and related areas, it shall be the policy of the Frederick County Sheriff’s 
Office to use mobile video/audio recording equipment to enforce criminal laws 
and traffic violations when possible. 

PROCEDURE 

A. 

Program Objectives 

The Frederick County Sheriff’s Office has adopted the use of in-car 
video/audio recording systems and video/audio recording systems worn 
by deputies (Body Cameras) in order to accomplish the following 
objectives: 

Page 1 of 9  

 

 
1) 

2) 

 

Accurate documentation of events, actions, conditions and 
statements made during arrests and critical incidents, so as to 
enhance deputy reports, collection of evidence, and testimony in 
court. 

The enhancement of this agency’s ability to review probable 
cause for arrest, arrest procedures, deputy and suspect 
interaction, and evidence for investigative purposes, as well as 
for deputy evaluation and training. 

IV.  OPERATION:  IN-CAR CAMERA 
 

A. 

Equipment 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. 

2. 

3. 

 
4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

Deputies are responsible for the recording equipment installed in 
their vehicles or issued to them.  They will maintain the 
equipment according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. 

Deputies shall inspect their assigned equipment prior to 
beginning their tour of duty to ensure that the equipment is 
operational and that it has not been damaged. 

Any deficiencies should immediately be reported to their 
supervisor so that necessary repairs may be made. 

Deputies will not use the equipment if it is malfunctioning in any 
way. 

Supervisors shall inspect the deputy’s in-car systems bimonthly 
and document the results on the vehicle inspection form.  

Deputies will exercise reasonable care when using this 
equipment. 

In car cameras should be periodically checked to be sure they are 
securely mounted properly adjusted and all wires properly 
connected.   

Deputies shall not perform operational adjustments or 
modifications to their assigned equipment.  Authorized personnel 
will make all repairs, modifications, etc. to the equipment. 

Microphones and cords are very fragile and should be protected 
as much as possible.  It is recommended that they be concealed 
inside the uniform shirt, with the cord extended as far as possible 

Page 2 of 9  

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

for maximum operating range.  When zipping the shirt, be 
careful to avoid damaging the cord with the zipper. 

10. 

Transmitters should be worn as designed by the manufacturer 
and placed on the duty belt in a comfortable and convenient 
location, and protected as much as possible.  Transmitter 
frequencies are matched to those of their receivers, and the units 
are not interchangeable with other units.  Transmitters should be 
recharged before each tour of duty. 

B. 

Operating Procedures 

1. 

The recorder may be activated in any one of three (3) ways: 

a. 

b. 

c. 

Manually-by pressing the “Record” button; 

Automatically-by turning on the emergency lights;  

Remotely-by turning on the wireless microphone to the 
correct frequency if the “Remote” feature is activated.  It 
is recommended that the “Remote” feature be activated 
routinely.  NOTE: When power to the unit is turned off, 
the “Remote” feature will automatically deactivate.  
When power is restored, the “Remote” feature must again 
be activated. 

2. 

Regardless of how the recording equipment is activated, it can 
only be turned off manually, by depressing the “Stop” button 
until the “Record” indicator light (LED) goes off.  Remember to 
manually turn off the microphone at the same time. 

C. 

Focus 

Deputies should adjust the focus on the camera at a predetermined 
distance to make sure the camera accurately records the suspect 
vehicle’s registration. 

D. 

Monitor/DVR 

The monitor is to be used for adjustment of the camera view and review 
of recorder incidents.  The monitor should be turned off while the 
vehicle is in motion.  The DVR also has a screen that can be used the 
same as the monitor.  The DVR will be locked in its in car docking 
station, unless it is removed for data downloading.  The key should be 
removed from the docking station. 

Page 3 of 9  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

E. 

Body Microphone 

The body microphone shall be worn on the gun belt at all times.  The 
body microphone shall be activated at all times during traffic 
enforcement activities (primary unit only). 

 
F. 

In Car Microphone (ICM) 
 
The ICM shall be on anytime a prisoner is transported. 

G. 

Guidelines for Recording 

1. 

 
2. 
 
3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

Anytime the emergency equipment is activated the system will 
begin recording the event; therefore, all emergency responses, 
traffic stops, pursuits, etc. shall be recorded until the end of that 
incident. 

A deputy may self-initiate a recording of any event.  

Once the recording of an incident has begun, the recording of 
both audio and video should be continued until the completion of 
the incident.  If for any reason the recording is discontinued, the 
reason should be properly documented. 

Deputies will inform any person who inquires that video-
recording equipment is in use. 

Deputies may inform subjects that recording equipment is in use, 
if they feel it will be beneficial in resolving an incident. 

Deputies are not required to discontinue recording at the request 
of anyone other than a superior deputy. 

Deputies will indicate in his/her IBR/DUI report that a recording 
was made of the incident. 

Absent unusual circumstances, the camera will remain on at all 
times while the vehicle is in motion.  The camera continuously 
records and erases data.  When an incident occurs the deputy 
should immediately start recording.  The system automatically 
saves the previous 30 seconds of video recording before the 
system was activated.  Do not use the pause button to stop 
recording. 

9. 

Anytime the camera is on the microphone shall also be on.  The 
deputy may narrate things that are detected that the camera may 

Page 4 of 9  

10. 

11. 

12. 

not be able to record (objects/evidence inside of a vehicle, 
smells, PBT readings, etc.). 

The microphone may be turned off while a deputy is speaking 
with another deputy outside the presence of the citizen. 

The recording equipment should not be used for non-official 
business. 

Deputies may program the microphone frequencies into their 
scanners; however, anytime a suspect or arrested person is placed 
into the cruiser, the scanner must be turned off. This will prevent 
the suspect or arrested person from hearing conversations, which 
may be detrimental to further investigations. 

OPERATION:  BODY CAMERA 

A. 

Equipment 
 
1.  Deputies are responsible for the body camera and micro SD card 

issued to them.  They will maintain the equipment according to the 
manufacturer’s recommendations. 

 
2.  Deputies shall inspect their assigned equipment prior to beginning 

their tour of duty to ensure that the equipment is operational and that 
it has not been damaged. 

 
3.  Any deficiencies should immediately be reported to their supervisor 

so that necessary repairs may be made. 

 
4.  Deputies will not use the equipment if it is malfunctioning in any 

way. 

 
5.  Supervisors shall inspect the deputy’s body camera bimonthly and 

document the results on the vehicle inspection form. 

 
B. 

Guidelines for Recording 
 
1. 
 
2. 

A deputy may self-initiate a recording of any event.  

Once the recording of an incident has begun, the recording 
should be continued until the completion of the incident.  If for 
any reason the recording is discontinued, the reason should be 
properly documented. 

 

 

 

 
V. 
 

 

 

Page 5 of 9  

 

 

 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

Deputies will inform any person who inquires that video-
recording equipment is in use. 

Deputies may inform subjects that recording equipment is in use, 
if they feel it will be beneficial in resolving an incident. 

Deputies are not required to discontinue recording at the request 
of anyone other than a superior deputy. 

Deputies will indicate in his/her IBR report that a recording was 
made of the incident. 

 
VI.  DATA  
 

A. 

Downloading/Storing Data 

 

 

 

1. 

 
2. 

 
3. 

 
4. 

 
5. 

 
6. 

Depending on camera usage, it is recommended that every 
deputy assigned an in car camera shall remove the DVR at the 
beginning or ending of each tour of duty and download the data 
into the data storage system in the Sheriff’s Office.  Deputies 
should avoid waiting until the DVR is completely full of data 
before downloading the data. 

Deputies assigned a body camera may download the data from 
the SD card at the beginning or ending of their shift.    

Deputies shall use the assigned docking stations/computers in the 
Sheriff’s Office for downloading the data from the DVR/body 
camera.  Both docking stations/computers share a single stand-
alone hard drive system for storing the data from all DVRs/body 
cameras. 

Deputies will not download data from the DVR/body camera 
onto other computers unless authorized to do so by a supervisor. 

The data downloaded from the DVR/body camera will be stored 
on the hard drive of the docking stations/computers for 60 days 
from the date the data was downloaded.  After 60 days the data 
will be erased from the hard drive.  

Deputies shall not erase or alter recordings from the DVRs or 
body cameras. 

B. 

Ownership, Custody, and Control of Recorded Data 

Page 6 of 9  

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. 

2. 

 
3. 

 
4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

It is Frederick County Sheriff’s Office policy that all recordings 
generated on Sheriff’s Office equipment (DVRs/Body Cameras) 
are the property of the Sheriff’s Office. 

Each deputy is responsible for downloading the specific data 
from the docking stations/computers hard drive onto a CD/DVD 
for any incident(s) that is needed as evidence in court.  The 
deputy will make one copy to be turned in as evidence and a 
second copy, which will be retained by the deputy to be taken to 
court. 

CD/DVDs that are placed into the evidence/property room are 
evidence, and must be handled as such.  For this reason, the 
chain of custody must be kept as short as possible and 
documented by all who handle the CD/DVD. 

The evidence/property clerk shall store the CD/DVD in the 
property/evidence room. The evidence/property clerk shall 
maintain a record of all incoming CD/DVDs, which allows for 
the location and retrieval of specific CD/DVDs as needed for 
viewing, duplication, etc. 

The Commonwealth’s Attorney requires one incident per 
CD/DVD whenever they are prosecuting the case. 

The CD/DVD recording placed into evidence will not be 
removed from the Sheriff’s Office unless by court order.   A 
copy of the evidential CD/DVD will be made for a requesting 
party after a member of the Administrative staff has approved the 
request. 

CD/DVDs containing information that will be presented as 
evidence in the prosecution of criminal cases or in civil 
proceedings shall be safeguarded the same as other forms of 
evidence. 

The CD/DVDs that deputies use as evidence may be recycled 
after the case is disposed of and all appeals are exhausted. 

No Sheriff’s Office CD/DVD recording of any incident shall be 
released to any news agency, person, or placed on a social 
network/Internet without the permission of the Sheriff.  
Furthermore, duplication of any recording or a segment of a 
recording generated by Sheriff’s Office owned mobile 
audio/video recording equipment for other than a legitimate law 
enforcement purpose is prohibited. 

Page 7 of 9  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
C. 

Use of Data for Training Purposes 

1. 

Periodically, video cameras or body camera’s record events 
which may prove useful as training aids.  Therefore, when these 
cameras record unusual, exceptional, or felony incidents and the 
incidents recorded are perceived to be of value as a training aid, 
the following procedure shall apply. 

a. 

 
b. 

Deputies are encouraged to bring to the attention of their 
supervisors any recording(s) they feel may be useful as a 
training aid. 

The supervisor will forward the information to a 
command staff member for possible use in future 
Sheriff’s Office training. 

D. 

Viewing of Recorded Data 

1. 

2. 

The original CD/DVD recording should not be removed from 
evidence unless so ordered by a court.  In this case, a duplicate 
CD/DVD will be made prior to releasing the original.  In most 
cases the copy of the original CD/DVD should be viewed.  If the 
original CD/DVD has to be removed from the property/evidence 
room it shall be treated the same as any other evidence/property 
removed form the room. 

Deputies may view recorded data for the purpose of critiquing 
their own performance, as well as preparing themselves to testify 
in cases where such recordings may be used as evidence. 

3. 

Supervisors should periodically view recorded data to 

a. 

b. 
 
c. 

Determine if Sheriff’s Office rules, regulations and 
procedures are being followed. 

Investigate allegations of misconduct. 

Determine training needs and the effectiveness of 
previous training. 

 

4. 

Viewing by other people 

The Command Staff may view recorded data at their 
discretion. 

a. 

 

Page 8 of 9  

b. 

c. 

Frederick County Sheriff’s Office members and 
prosecutors may view recorded data as necessary to 
complete their investigations and/or prosecutions. 

CD/DVDs relevant to a pending or contemplated criminal 
action may not be viewed by others, including defendants 
and defense attorneys, without the written permission of 
the arresting deputy and the Commonwealths’ Attorney.  
Dissemination of CD/DVD information is subject to the 
same laws and policy as other records material. 

d. 

Members of the press may view CD/DVDs only as 
specifically authorized by the Sheriff or Major. 

E. 

Duplication of Recorded Data 

1. 

2. 

3. 

The Evidence/Property Clerk or other designee shall make 
duplicates of CD/DVD’s as requested in accordance with this 
policy or as specifically approved by the Sheriff. 

Requests from other law enforcement agencies shall be made on 
official departmental letterhead and signed by the department 
head.   

Requests from the media or other non-law enforcement agencies 
or individuals must be accompanied by a fee of a minimum of 
$25.00 per event made payable to the Frederick County Sheriff’s 
Office.  All such requests must be in writing and from persons 
entitled to view such data in accordance with this policy and the 
law.  Records will be kept of all requests and all duplicates made 
and the distribution of such duplicate CD/DVDs. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Page 9 of 9  

