 

  

GALAX POLICE DEPARTMENT  

GENERAL ORDERS 

SUBJECT:  Body Worn Cameras  

NUMBER:  1-27 

EFFECTIVE DATE: 06-12-2014 

AMENDED DATE: 

AMENDS/SUPERSEDES:  N/A 

 

APPROVED: _______________________ 
                           Chief of Police 

 

NOTE   

 

This order is for internal use only, and does not enlarge an officer's civil or criminal 
liability in any way.  It should not be construed as the creation of a higher standard 
of  safety  or  care  in  an  evidentiary  sense,  with  respect  to  third-party  claims.  
Violations of this directive, if proven, can only form the basis of a complaint by this 
department, and then only in a non-judicial administrative setting. 

 

 
 
 
 

 

INDEX WORDS  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
I.  PURPOSE 

Body Worn Camera (BWC) 

This policy is intended to provide officers with instructions on when and how to use 

body-worn cameras (BWCs) so that officers may reliably record their contacts with the public 
in accordance with the law. 

 

II.  POLICY 

It is the policy of this department that officers shall activate the BWC when such use is 
appropriate to the proper performance of his or her official duties, where the recordings are 
consistent with this policy and law. This policy does not govern the use of surreptitious 
recording devices used in undercover operations. 

 

III. PROCEDURES 

A. 

Administration 

This agency has adopted the use of the BWC to accomplish several objectives. The 
primary objectives are as follows: 

1.  BWCs allow for accurate documentation of police-public contacts, arrests, and 
critical incidents. They also serve to enhance the accuracy of officer reports and 
testimony in court. 

2.  Audio and video recordings also enhance this agency’s ability to review probable 
cause for arrest, officer and suspect interaction, and evidence for investigative and 

 

 

1-27.1 

 

 

 

prosecutorial purposes and to provide additional information for officer evaluation 
and training. 

3.  The BWC may also be useful in documenting crime and accident scenes or other 

events that include the confiscation and documentation of evidence or contraband. 

B. 

When and How to Use the BWC 
1.  Officers shall activate the BWC to record all contacts with citizens in the 

performance of official duties. 

2.  Officers may inform individuals that they are being recorded. The BWC shall 

remain activated until the event is completed in order to ensure the integrity of the 
recording unless the contact moves into an area restricted by this policy (see items 
D.1-4).  

3.  If an officer fails to activate the BWC, fails to record the entire contact, or 

interrupts the recording, the officer shall document why a recording was not made, 
was interrupted, or was terminated in the associated Incident Report or Call for 
Service. 

4.  Civilians shall not be allowed to review the recordings at the scene. 

 

C. 

Procedures for BWC Use 
1.  BWC equipment is issued primarily to uniformed personnel as authorized by this 

agency. Officers who are assigned BWC equipment must use the equipment 
unless otherwise authorized by supervisory personnel. 

2.  Police personnel shall use only BWCs issued by this department.  The BWC 

equipment and all data, images, video, and metadata captured, recorded, or 
otherwise produced by the equipment is the sole property of the agency. 

3.  Police personnel who are assigned BWCs must complete an agency approved 

and/or provided training program to ensure proper use and operations. Additional 
training may be required at periodic intervals to ensure the continued effective use 
and operation of the equipment, proper calibration and performance, and to 
incorporate changes, updates, or other revisions in policy and equipment. 

4.  BWC equipment is the responsibility of individual officers and will be used with 

reasonable care to ensure proper functioning.  Equipment malfunctions shall be 
brought to the attention of the officer’s supervisor as soon as possible so that a 
replacement unit may be procured. 

5.  Officers shall inspect and test the BWC prior to each shift in order to verify proper 

functioning and shall notify their supervisor of any problems. 

6.  Officers shall not edit, alter, erase, duplicate, copy, share, or otherwise distribute 
in any manner BWC recordings without prior written authorization and approval 
of the Chief of Police or his or her designee.  

7.  Officers are encouraged to inform their supervisor of any recordings that may be 

of value for training purposes. 

8.  If an officer is suspected of wrongdoing or involved in an officer-involved 

shooting or other serious use of force, the department reserves the right to limit or 
restrict an officer from viewing the video file. 

9.  Requests for deletion of portions of the recordings (e.g., in the event of a personal 

recording) must be submitted in writing and approved by the Chief of Police or 

1-27.2 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

his or her designee in accordance with state record retention laws.  All requests 
and final decisions shall be kept on file. 

10. Officers shall note in incident, arrest, and related reports when recordings were 

made during the incident in question. However, BWC recordings are not a 
replacement for written reports. 

D. 

Restrictions on Using the BWC 

BWCs shall be used only in conjunction with official law enforcement duties. The BWC 
shall not generally be used to record: 

1.  Communications with other police personnel without the permission of the chief 

executive officer (CEO); 

2.  Encounters with undercover officers or confidential informants; 
3.  When on break or otherwise engaged in personal activities; or 
4.  In any location where individuals have a reasonable expectation of privacy, such 

as a restroom or locker room. 

E. 

Storage 
1.  All files shall be securely downloaded periodically and no later than the end of 

each shift.  Each file shall contain information related to the date, BWC identifier, 
and assigned officer. 

2.  All images and sounds recorded by the BWC are the exclusive property of this 

department.  Accessing, copying, or releasing files for non-law enforcement 
purposes is strictly prohibited. 

3.  All access to BWC data (images, sounds, and metadata) must be specifically 

authorized by the Chief of Police or his or her designee, and all access is to be 
audited to ensure that only authorized users are accessing the data for legitimate 
and authorized purposes. 

4.  Files should be securely stored at a minimum in accordance with state records 

retention laws. In capital punishment prosecutions, recordings shall be kept until 
the offender is no longer under control of a criminal justice agency. 

F. 

Supervisory Responsibilities 
1.  Supervisory personnel shall ensure that officers equipped with BWC devices 

utilize them in accordance with policy and procedures defined herein. 

2.  At least on a monthly basis, supervisors will randomly review BWC recordings to 

ensure that the equipment is operating properly and that officers are using the 
devices appropriately and in accordance with policy and to identify any areas in 
which additional training or guidance is required. 

 

 

 

 

  

1-27.3 

