AMERICAN CIVIL   
LIBERTIES UNION OF  
VIRGINIA 
701 E. FRANKLIN ST. 
SUITE 1412 
RICHMOND, VA 23219  
T/804.644.8022 
WWW .ACLUVA.ORG 
 
 

 

 

June 12, 2015 
 
 
 
Re: FOIA Request / Body Camera Equipment and Policy 
 
 
 
Dear FOIA Officer: 
 
 
This letter is a request under the Virginia Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), Va. Code § 2.2-3 
700 et seq. This request seeks records regarding law enforcement worn body cameras, also 
referred to as police body cameras or body-worn cameras (hereinafter “body cameras”). 
 
Records Requested 
 
Please provide copies of the following records: 

 

1.  All policies, practices, procedures, rules, or orders concerning the use of body 

cameras, including: 

a.  policies or procedures governing use of body cameras; 
b.  what types of data are obtained; 
c.  the conditions under which body cameras are used; 
d.  the frequency of body camera use; 
e.  the number of body camera units or systems acquired; and 
f. 

the number of officers equipped with body cameras; 

 

2.  All policies, practices, procedures, rules, or orders concerning the review of body 
camera data by supervising officers or staff or civilian review personnel to ensure 
officer compliance with department or agency policies and applicable state and 
federal law; 

3.  All policies, practices, procedures, rules, or orders concerning the storage of data 

obtained using body cameras, including: 

a.  where the data is stored; 
b.  how long data is stored; 
c.  when data must be discarded; and 
d.  how much data your agency or department currently stores; 

 

4.  All policies, practices, procedures, rules, or orders concerning access to body 

camera data, including: 

a.  the legal justification required before a law enforcement employee or 
b.  member of the public may access body camera data; 
c.  purposes for which the data may be accessed; 
d.  purposes for which the data may not be accessed; 
e.  who may access the data, what procedures they must go through to obtain 

f. 

access, and who must authorize access; and 
the existence of a system that records who accesses the data and when the 
data is accessed; 

 

 

 

 

5.  All policies, practices, procedures, rules, or orders concerning the sharing of data 

obtained through body cameras, including: 

a.  what type of data1 is shared; 
b.  what databases your agency puts collected body camera data into; and 
c.  third parties, governmental or private, that may access your agency’s body 

camera data, including what procedures a third party must go through to 
access the data and any restrictions placed on a third party regarding 
further sharing of your body camera data; 

6.  All agreements to share body camera data with outside agencies or departments, 

corporations, or other entities; and 
 

7.  All training materials used to instruct members of your department or agency in 
body camera deployment, data management, or operation of automated records 
systems that contain body camera data to which any member of your department 
or agency has access, including regional or shared databases. 

 
Please inform me in advance if the cost of complying with this request will be greater 
than $50. 
 
If the requested documents are available in electronic form, please e-mail them to me at 
fknaack@acluva.org. Otherwise, please mail them to me at ACLU of Virginia, 701 F 
Franklin Street, Suite 1412, Richmond, Virginia 23219.  Please respond within five (5) 
business days as required by FOIA. Thank you for your prompt attention to this matter. If 
you have questions, please contact me at fknaack@acluva.org or (804) 644-8022. 
 
Sincerely, 

Frank Knaack 
Director, Public Policy and Communications 

 

AMERICAN CIVIL   
LIBERTIES UNION OF  
VIRGINIA 
701 E. FRANKLIN ST. 
SUITE 1412 
RICHMOND, VA 23219  
T/804.644.8022 
WWW .ACLUVA.ORG 
 
 

                                                 
1 “Data” or “body camera data” means any data recorded by a body camera. 

