 
Re: FOIA Request / Body Camera Equipment and Policy  
Dear Attn: FOIA Officer:  
Aquia Harbour Police Department  
Attn: FOIA Officer  
1221 Washington Drive  
Stafford, VA 22554  
June 12, 2015  
Records Requested  
 
Please provide copies of the following records:  
1. All policies, practices, procedures, rules, or orders concerning the use of body cameras, including: 
(attached) 
a. policies or procedures governing use of body cameras;  
b. what types of data are obtained;  
c. the conditions under which body cameras are used;  
d. the frequency of body camera use;  
e. the number of body camera units or systems acquired; (3 Vievu Body Cameras) 
f. the number of officers equipped with body cameras; (We have 7 officers and 3 cameras, they wear 
them “as available”. 
 
2. All policies, practices, procedures, rules, or orders concerning the review of body camera data by 
supervising officers or staff or civilian review personnel to ensure officer compliance with 
department or agency policies and applicable state and federal law;  
 
3. All policies, practices, procedures, rules, or orders concerning the storage of data obtained using 
body cameras, including:  
a. where the data is stored; (Designated air gapped computer) 
b. how long data is stored; (automated – deletes after 90 days)  
c. when data must be discarded; and  
d. how much data your agency or department currently stores; (We don’t store any data beyond 90 
days unless it is needed for court in which case it is downloaded onto a disk and housed as evidence.) 
 
4. All policies, practices, procedures, rules, or orders concerning access to body camera data, 
including:  
a. the legal justification required before a law enforcement employee or  
b. member of the public may access body camera data; (case by case, but generally always made 
available to the parties involved and made available to public on case by case basis)  
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION OF VIRGINIA 701 E. FRANKLIN ST. SUITE 1412 RICHMOND, VA 23219 T/804.644.8080 WWW.ACLUVA.ORG  
 

 
c. purposes for which the data may be accessed;  
d. purposes for which the data may not be accessed;  
e. who may access the data, what procedures they must go through to obtain access, and who must 
authorize access; and  
f. the existence of a system that records who accesses the data and when the data is accessed;  
 
5. All policies, practices, procedures, rules, or orders concerning the sharing of data obtained through 
body cameras, including:  
a. what type of data1 is shared;  
b. what databases your agency puts collected body camera data into; and Vievu storage system 
c. third parties, governmental or private, that may access your agency’s body camera data, including 
what procedures a third party must go through to access the data and any restrictions placed on a 
third party regarding further sharing of your body camera data;  
 
6. All agreements to share body camera data with outside agencies or departments, corporations, or 
other entities; and (no agreement)  
 
7. All training materials used to instruct members of your department or agency in body camera 
deployment, data management, or operation of automated records systems that contain body camera 
data to which any member of your department or agency has access, including regional or shared 
databases.  
 
Please inform me in advance if the cost of complying with this request will be greater than $50.  
If the requested documents are available in electronic form, please e-mail them to me at 
fknaack@acluva.org. Otherwise, please mail them to me at ACLU of Virginia, 701 F Franklin Street, 
Suite 1412, Richmond, Virginia 23219. Please respond within five (5) business days as required by 
FOIA. Thank you for your prompt attention to this matter. If you have questions, please contact me 
at fknaack@acluva.org or (804) 523-2144. 

 

 

I. 

  

 

POLICY 

 

It is the policy of the department to protect and ensure the safety and welfare of our 
citizens and department personnel. Video documentation has become an integral and 
valued  tool  in  Law  Enforcement  for  those  agencies  that  have  adopted  patrol  car 
mounted  cameras.  The  value  has  repeatedly  outweighed  the  equipment  and  training 
costs  involved  with  enhanced  evidence  gathering,  report  accuracy,  complaint 
management  and  increased  professionalism.  Thus,  wearable  video  technology  is  the 
next  logical  step.  The  Aquia  Harbour  Police  Department  has  adopted  standard 
operation procedures when using the on-officer camera. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

II. 

PURPOSE 

 

Officer safety is of paramount concern for the Aquia Harbour Police Department.  In 
order to  

             provide  enhanced  safety,  field  units  are  being  equipped  with  wearable  Video/Audio 
systems. The VIEVU can be used to record traffic stops, incidents, suspicious and/or 
criminal  activity.    Digital  recorded  evidence  can  greatly  enhance  a  criminal 
investigation by providing graphics.  

 

 

III. 

OBJECTIVES 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The principle objectives of the On-officer camera program include: 

a.   Enhancing officer safety 

b.   Identifying criminal activity 

c.   Identifying suspects 

d    Preventing/deterring crime and public disorder 

e.   Reducing and removing the fear of crime 

                         f.   Improving agency accountability 

g.   Simplifying incident review 

h.   Enhancing new recruit and in-service training  ( post-incident use of videos) 

i.   Improving Community/Media perceptions 

j.   Strengthening police leadership 

k.  Advancing prosecution/case resolution 

l.   Enhancing officer performance and professionalism 

m.  Increasing homeland security 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

IV. 

PROCEDURES 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. 

2. 

2. 

When  a  VIEVU  body  camera  is  available  to  them,  patrol  officers  are 
expected to wear them during their tour of duty.  
 
The  camera  system  will  be  maintained  according  to  manufacturer’s 
recommendations. The VIEVU wearable video camera is the only Agency 
approved On-officer camera. 

At the beginning of each tour of duty, it shall be the responsibility of the patrol 
officer wearing the camera to insure that the camera is in working order; 

 

a.   

Camera  batteries  will  be  charged,  in  either  the  wall  mount  or  vehicle 
charger.   

 

 

                                      The  LED  red  light  will  go  off  when  the  charge  is  complete.  A  blinking 
green LED light indicates that the camera is on and recording. The LED 
will  blink  green  until  the  camera  is  turned  off.  When  the  LED  green 
blinking light turns to a red blinking light you have about twenty percent 
(20%) of space/power left.  

 

 

 

 

 

3. 

  

b.   

c.    

The On-officer camera will be worn on the Agency uniform in a manner 
that ensures images in front of the officer are captured and recorded.  

 The camera can record approximately four and one-half hours of video 
per  ten  hour  shift.  Care  should  be  used  so  that  recordable  time  is  not 
wasted. 

Activation  of  the  camera  is  generally  at  the  discretion  of  the  officer,  however, 
activation 
 is strongly encouraged for  the following;   

            a.    

Traffic stops.  

 

 

b.   

Suspicious incidents or any other incident where officer safety may  

 

 

 

 

 

 

    

 

 

                                            

become an issue. i.e. Building searches, alarms, etc. 

                                      

 

 

c.    

Domestic Violence situations. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

d.    

Any incident which may lead to an arrest, i.e. Drunk in Public, etc. 

 

e.  On scene Investigative Interviews with victims/witnesses to  include 
        their present location or agency vehicles.   

 

f.     Once activate, the camera shall not be turned off mid-altercation. However, it 

       intermittently re-started to keep tape segments short.  

V. 

CRIME SCENE ACTIVATION 

 

 Crime Scene Activation. Digitally recording evidence at a scene assists greatly in 
 capture  of  evidence.  Therefore,  officers  are  encouraged  to  activate  their 
 cameras  upon  arrival  and  while  securing  the  scene  pending  the 

1. 
the              
On-officer                     
arrival of the                                

 Investigator of Evidence Technician. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

Announcement of date, time, location and purpose of the recording. 
 
A capture of the general scene or of an individual. A full frame capture of the 
person. 

A  capture  showing  the  relationship  of  any  injuries  to  the  subject’s  body. 
(privacy                       should be taken into consideration especially in the 
case of a person with the                                    opposite gender to the 
officer). 
 
Officers are not able to  delete or edit recordings and should not attempt to 
tamper                             
with  the  camera’s  stored  recording.  Digital  images  that  are  relevant  for                                      
investigative or trial purposes should be downloaded to a DVD, marked for 
court and kept with the officer’s investigative file.  

 

7. 

The  officer  should  note  in  the  officer’s  incident  report  that  digital  recordings  had 
been  taken. 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
may be  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

VI. 

DOWNLOADING TO COMPUTER 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

At the conclusion of the officer’s tour of duty, the officer shall; 

1.  

Download all recordings to the designated computer at the police station. 

2. 

Review any pertinent recordings and request a DVD be made by a supervisor 

 

 

3. 

 

on specific recording pending trial. NOTE: only systems administrators can create a                                          

recording of any incident. 

Supervisors will make a DVD copy, and return the disk to the officer to be listed as                                            

evidence.  

a. 

b. 

c. 

d. 

This  master  shall  serve  as  the  permanent  record.    A  separate 
DVD should be created for each criminal case or investigation, 
and the DVD is copy protected 

Once  the  recording  are  downloaded,  the  cameras  memory  is 
emptied and ready for new recordings.   

The  supervisor  should  confirm  that  the  digital  images  were 
correctly                                                                      
transferred to a blank DVD by; 

Officers shall leave VIEVU cameras at the police station, at the                                                     
completion  of  their  tour  of  duty.  The  camera  shall  be  plugged 
into the twelve volt lighter charger for use by the next officer on 
duty.    

VII.  CONFIDENTIALITY 

 

1. 

Video recordings shall be conducted in a professional, ethical and legal manner. 

 

2. 

 

 

 

Video  surveillance  for  the  purpose  of  monitoring  work  areas,  social  areas  or 
sensitive  areas  should  only  occur  in  special  circumstances,  and  this  surveillance 
should 
the 
prevention/deterrence of illegal activity and the enhancement of safety. 

the  policy’s  principle  objectives,  which 

include 

further 

 

All  recordings  that  are  related  to,  or  of  value  to  an  investigation  are  to  be  kept 

 
strictly                                        

3. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

confidential. 

4, 

5, 

6. 

On-officer  cameras  shall  not  be  directed  through  windows  of  a  residential 
dwelling                                           where an individual has a reasonable 
expectation of privacy. 

Copies  of 
evidence/training purposes and shall be controlled by the Chief of Police. 

recording  shall  only  be  made 

investigative  and/or 

for 

Each  individual  officer  is  responsible  for  all  recordings  captured  by  their 
assigned camera. 

VIII.  LEGALITY 

1. 

The State of Virginia is a one party consent state. Therefore, only the 
officer need           know that the recording of the encounter is taking 
place but if asked officers are encouraged to explain the camera and the 
purpose of it to any citizens that take an interest in it.  

IX. 

TRAINING 

 

 

 

1.  

Officers will receive in-service training on the proper use of the Agency issued 
on-                                            officer camera. Training will include but not be 
limited to:  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
LED  

 

 

 

 

 

Setup and battery charging. 

Uniform placement. 

Recording techniques. 

Weather conditions. 

Camera subject bearings. 

Proper care and servicing. 

Downloading procedures. 

Review of recordings. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

X.  

FAQ 

a. 

b. 

c. 

d. 

e. 

f. 

g. 

h. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

How do I know the Vievu is recording ? 

1. 

 

A.        When the unit is recording, The LED light will  blink green until the unit is turned 

off. 

How can I tell when the battery/free space is almost used up ? 

The  LED  light  will  turn  red  and  continue  blinking  when  you  have  about  20%  of                                                  
time/space left. 

How do I know when my VIEVU is fully charged ? 

2. 

 

A. 

3. 

 

A. 

The LED light will show solid red when charging. When charge is complete. The 

 

light will go off completely.  

How long does it take to charge the battery ? 

4. 

 

A. 

The VIEVU PVR uses a lithium ion battery. A completely dead battery will take 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

approximately three (3) hours using the wall charger. 

When capacity is full, will my VIEVU stop recording or will it loop over itself ? 

5. 

 

A. 

The camera will stop recording at full capacity and the LED light will turn red. 

6. 

 

A. 

The time stamp is incorrect on my videos ? 

All  the VIEVU  PVR’s  are set  to  GMT time  (  Greenwich  Mean Time  ) to  ensure 
accuracy and, if needed, accountability in court. 

XI. 

GREENWICH MEAN TIME 

 

 

1. 

2. 

When Virginia is  on  Eastern  Daylight  Time. (  Arrives 2:00  A,M. on the second 
Sunday of March) it is four (4) hours behind Greenwich Mean Time. (GMT) 

When Virginia is on   Eastern Standard Time.  (  Arrives 2:00 A.M. on the first  
Sunday in November) it is five (5) hours behind Greenwich Mean Time. (GMT) 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

