 

 
I. 
 

II. 
 

III. 
 
 

POLICY & PROCEDURE  

SERIES # 214 

PAGE 1 OF 5 

SUBJECT 
 
MOBILE & BODY WORN RECORDERS 

DISTRIBUTION 

ALL MANUALS 

 

AMENDS/SUPERSEDES/CANCELS 
 

EFFECTIVE DATE 

2/6/14 

APPROVED 

 

VLEPSC STANDARDS 

OPR.01.11 a-c 

PURPOSE: 

It  is  the purpose  of this  policy  to  provide  officers  with  guidelines  for  the  use of 
mobile and body worn recording equipment. 
  
POLICY: 

Mobile  video/audio  recording  (MVR)  equipment  and  body  worn  (VID-MIC)  have 
demonstrated  value  in  collecting  visual  and  audible  evidence  to  expedite  the 
prosecution  and  adjudication  of  criminal  cases,  as  well  as  to  promote  officer 
safety, provide corroboration of the officer’s testimony, and to be an eyewitness 
to the events as they occur. In order to maximize the utility of this equipment in 
these  related  areas,  officers  shall  follow  the  procedures  for  the  MVR  and  VID-
MIC equipment set forth in this policy. 
 
PROCEDURES:  

A. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Equipment: 

1. 
 
 

2. 
 

3. 
 
 

4. 
 
 

5. 
 

6. 

MVR equipment installed in vehicles is the responsibility of the  
officer assigned to that vehicle and will be maintained according to  
manufacturer’s recommendations. 

VID-MIC cameras shall be issued to individual officers and be the  
responsibility of the officer to maintain. 

Equipment shall be inspected prior to the beginning of the officer’s 
tour of duty and any deficiencies shall be reported to a supervisor  
immediately.   

VID-MIC cameras should be worn in the manner suggested by the  
manufacturer, which is center of the torso.  This should be done to  
produce the best possible image. 

No modifications or operational adjustments shall be made except  
by technicians or other authorized personnel.   

MVR wireless microphones should be worn on the duty belt in a  

POLICY & PROCEDURE SERIES #214 

Page 2 of 5 

comfortable and convenient location.  Transmitter frequencies are    
matched to those of their receivers and may not be interchanged. 

 
 
 
      7.  MVR systems must be manually powered on and off by the operator. 
 
 

IV.  OPERATING PROCEDURES (MVR): 
 

A.  Recorder (MVR): 

 
1.  The recorder may be activated in one of three ways: 

a.  Manually, by pressing the “Record” button, 
b.  Automatically, by activating the vehicle emergency lights 
c.  Remotely, by activating the wireless microphone 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V. 
 

2.  Regardless  of  how  the  recorder  is  activated,  it  can  only  be  deactivated 

manually by depressing the “STOP” button. 

B.  Vaults: 
 
     1.  All vaults and hard drive access doors shall be locked at all times.    
 
 
 

Fan intakes on the vaults shall be kept clear of debris and other  
obstructions.   

C.   Data Identifiers: 

      1.  Data identifying information will include: 

 
 
 
 

a.   Date and time 
b.   Badge number 
c.   Name of officer 
d.   Department name or initials 

  
OPERATING PROCEDURES (VID-MIC): 

A.  Recorder (VID-MIC): 

 
1.  The  recorder  is  designed  to  be  both  a  video/audio  recorder  and  radio 

microphone.   
 

2.  The camera unit is activated by depressing the button on the center of the 

front of the microphone.  
 

3.  The  camera  will  record  until  either  manually  stopped  or  the  hard  drive  is 

full. 

POLICY & PROCEDURE SERIES #214 

Page 3 of 5 

 

4.  The VID-MIC unit may also be used as a “still” camera.  That function may 

be activated by depressing the button on the top of the unit. 

     4.  Observation of potential DUI offenders prior to stop, performance of field  
 

sobriety testing, and transport if arrested. 

     7.  Any contact with the public in the performance of duty 

     8.   Any other incident where the officer feels the presence of video/audio  
 

evidence may be beneficial.      

(OPR.01.11a) 

 

 

     5.  Prisoner transport (MVR only) 

     6.   Vehicle searches and inventories 

     3.  Traffic stops 

A.  Events to be recorded include: 

     1.  Emergency responses 
     
     2.  Pursuits 

 
 
VI.  GUIDELINES FOR RECORDING: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

B.  Recording Procedures: 

      1.  Once recording has begun it should be continued until its completion, if for 
 
 

any reason the recording is discontinued it shall be documented in the  
report narrative. 

      2.  Officers are not required to discontinue videotaping at the request of  
 

anyone other than a supervisor.   

      3.  Officers will inform any person that they are being recorded if they so ask. 

      4.  Officers will indicate in their incident and other related reports that video  
 

and/or audio was used. 

      5.  Anytime the recorder is on while outside the patrol vehicle, the  
 
 

microphone shall also be on.  The officer should remember to narrate  
events occurring not in the view of the camera. 

 

      6.  MVR and VID-MIC equipment shall not be used for personal business. 

POLICY & PROCEDURE SERIES #214 

Page 4 of 5 

      
     7.  Officers should remember that recordings are of physical/verbal actions to  
 

include employees. 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
VII.  DATA STORAGE AND RETRIEVAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

A.  Retrieval and storage of recorded events: 

      1.  Events captured by either the MVR or VID-MIC systems shall be  
 
 
 
 

 
downloaded by the Administrative Captain once the unit’s  
 
storage has become full or when otherwise necessary.  Access to    
recorded data shall be under the control of the Administrative Captain.  
 

(OPR.01.11b) 

 

 

 

 

 

      2.  Recorded information from the hard drive that is of evidentiary value is  
 
 
 
 
 

evidence and will be retained for a minimum of three (3) years or until the  
case is resolved or the evidence is released, whichever is longer, and  
must be handled as such.  For this reason the chain-of-custody must be  
kept as short as possible and documented by all who handle the tapes.  
 

(OPR.01.11c)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

      3.  Recorded information that is not considered evidence will be destroyed  
 

after thirty (30) days. 

(OPR.01.11c)  

 

 

 

 

      4.  Recorded data that is considered evidence shall be transferred to a DVD  
 
 

or CD and placed in the evidence room in accordance with department  
policy.  

 

      5.  All original recorded media shall be stored on a separate hard drive under  
 

the control of the Administrative Captain. 

 
B.   Owner and Custody of Recorded Media 

      1.  All recorded media shall be the property of the Tappahannock Police  
 

Department. 

      2.  Recorded data shall not be released to another agency or entity without  
 

prior approval of the Chief or his/her designee.   

      3.  Recorded media may be released to the Commonwealth Attorney upon  
 

their request.   

      4.  All recorded events that are released shall be documented in the “Release 

POLICY & PROCEDURE SERIES #214 

Page 5 of 5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
any  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

of Recorded/Digital Media” log maintained by the Administrative Captain.    

 C.  Viewing of Recorded Media 

       1. The Administrative Captain shall arrange for viewing of digital media as  
 
 
 
 
 

requested and authorized by the Chief of Police, officers, the  
 
Commonwealth Attorney, defense attorneys, defendants, or as such  
ordered by the court.  Such viewing should take place at the police   
department at a reasonable time unless other arrangements have been  
made and agreed upon by all parties.   

       2. Officers may be given a copy of their recorded event for the purposes of  
 
 
 

critiquing,  report  completion  and  case  preparation.    Officers  shall  not  at 
time release, recreate, or redistribute any video or audio recording without  
approval of the Chief or his/her designee.   

       3. Supervisors may (and should) periodically view recorded media to: 

Determine if department policies, procedures, and rules are being  
followed. 

Ensure officer safety is not being compromised. 

Evaluate operational methods and make changes when necessary.  

Investigate allegations of misconduct by citizens, other officers or  
supervisors. 

Evaluate the performance of an officer for the purpose of correcting 
improper of inefficient actions.   

a. 
 

b. 

c. 

d. 
 

e. 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
        
      

