 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Virginia Department of 
Criminal Justice Services 
Model Policy on Body Worn Cameras 

         September 9, 2015 

 

 
The Department of Criminal Justice Services' (DCJS) Body Worn Camera Model Policy is 
intended to serve as a structured template to assist those law enforcement agencies with a need to 
develop their own comprehensive body worn camera policies and a resource identifying best 
practices to those agencies with existing policies. The procedural language of the model policy is 
separated into the following sections:  

 

A.  Use of Body Worn Cameras Generally 
B.  Equipment  
C.  Officer/Deputy Responsibility  
D.  Supervisor Responsibility  
E.  Privacy and Restricted Use  
F.  Access  
G.  Video Retention  

DCJS model policies are permissive in nature; therefore, there is no requirement that agencies 
adopt verbatim the language of this model policy.  
 

DCJS 

1 

 

The model policy was developed using language from the International Association of Chiefs of 
Police (IACP) Body Worn Camera Policy and the procedural language from body worn camera 
policies from six Virginia law enforcement agencies. DCJS would like to thank IACP for 
granting our agency permission to use portions of their Body Worn Camera Policy. Additionally, 
DCJS would like to thank the following agencies for assisting in the development of the DCJS' 
Body Worn Camera Model Policy. 
 
 

  Albemarle County Police Department 
  Chesapeake Police Department 
  Chesapeake Office of the Commonwealth's Attorney 
  Norfolk Police Department 
  Office of the Attorney General 
  Prince William County Police Department 
  Stafford County Sheriff's Office 
  Virginia Beach Police Department 
  Virginia State Police 
  York County-Poquoson Sheriff's Office 

 
 
The following police department policies were reviewed while developing the model policy.  
 

o  Alexandria Police Department 
o  Chesapeake Police Department  
o  Fairfax County Police Department 
o  Fredericksburg Police Department 
o  Henrico Division of Police 
o  Prince William County Police Department 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

DCJS 

2 

POLICE/SHERIFF'S DEPARTMENT     

 GENERAL ORDERS   

SUBJECT: Body Worn Cameras 

  NUMBER:   

EFFECTIVE DATE:  --/--/2015 

  REVIEW DATE:   

AMENDS/SUPERSEDES: NA 
 

  APPROVED: _______________________ 
                        Chief of Police/Sheriff 

VLEPSC STANDARDS: NA 
 

 

 
 
I. 

 
II. 
 
 

 
III. 

 

POLICY 
 
Law enforcement officers shall activate the body-worn cameras (BWCs) when such use 
is appropriate to the proper performance of his or her official duties and where the 
recordings are consistent with this policy and the law. The use of BWCs is intended to 
enhance transparency and accountability. This policy does not govern the use of covert 
recording devices used in undercover operations. 

PURPOSE 
 
This policy is intended to provide law enforcement officers with instructions on when 
and how to use BWCs, to accurately record law enforcement actions and to capture 
evidence for investigations and court proceedings. Additionally, the use of BWCs may 
result in reducing the number of complaints against officers/deputies and frivolous 
lawsuits against Police Departments and Sheriff's Offices. This procedure also sets forth 
guidelines for the management, storage, release, and retrieval of audio –visual media 
recorded by BWCs. 

PROCEDURES 
 
A.  Use of BWCs Generally 

1.  BWCs may be used to achieve the following: 

a.  Documentation of law enforcement-public contacts, arrests, and critical 

incidents; 

b.  Enhancement of law enforcement reports and courtroom testimony; 
c.  Documentation of crime and accident scenes or other events that include 

confiscation and documentation of evidence and contraband; 

d.  Supervisor review and evaluation of reasonable suspicion, probable cause for 

arrest, officer/deputy and suspect interaction, and evidence for investigative 
and prosecutorial purposes; 

e.  Identifying and correcting internal agency issues (i.e. tactics, communication, 

policy compliance, customer service, officer safety, etc.); and 

f.  Enhance law enforcement training. 

2.  Officers/deputies who are assigned BWCs shall complete a Department approved 

training program to ensure proper use and operation. Additional training may be 
required at periodic intervals to ensure the continued effective use and operation 
of equipment, proper calibration and performance, and to incorporate changes, 

DCJS 

3 

updates, or other revisions in Department policy and equipment.  

3.  Procedures or equipment shall be put in place to ensure officers/deputies do not 

edit, alter, or erase video/audio recorded by BWCs. 
 

B.  Equipment  

1.  Department issued BWCs shall be for official Departmental use only and shall not 

be used for non-work related or personal activities.  

2.  Law enforcement shall use only those BWCs issued by the Department. The 

wearing of personally owned BWC equipment or audio/video recording 
equipment shall not be permitted.  

3.  BWCs shall be issued and assigned to specific law enforcement personnel.  
4.  Law enforcement personnel shall not use BWC equipment assigned to other 

officers/deputies.  

5.  Intentional misuse or abuse of BWC equipment may result in disciplinary action.  

 

C.  Officer/Deputy Responsibility  

1.  Prior to beginning a shift, officers/deputies shall retrieve their assigned BWC and 

conduct an operational inspection. 

2.  Any BWC equipment malfunction shall be immediately documented and a 

supervisor will be notified of the malfunction as soon as practical. 

3.  Officers/deputies shall activate the BWC during each law enforcement-public 

encounter related to a call for service, law enforcement action, subject stop, traffic 
stop, and/or police/deputy services provided that such activation does not interfere 
with officer/deputy safety or the safety of others. Additionally, the BWC shall be 
activated for tactical activities such as, searches of buildings and vehicles, 
searches for suspects and missing persons, seizing and processing evidence, and 
building checks when security alarms are triggered. 

4.  Where practical officers/deputies shall monitor the position of the BWC to ensure 

the BWC is capturing evidentiary versus non-evidentiary (e.g. ground, sky, 
officer's/deputy's arm) footage.  

5.  Every officer/deputy on a scene shall activate their BWC and leave it on for the 

duration of the incident. This shall include transporting to and processing a person 
at the jail. 

6.  Officers/deputies shall note in incident, arrest, and related reports when video 

recordings were made. However, BWC recordings shall not be a replacement for 
written reports.  

7.  If an officer/deputy fails to activate the BWC, fails to record the entire contact, or 

interrupts/mutes the recording the officer/deputy shall document the reason. 

8.  Officers/deputies shall not edit, alter, erase, duplicate, copy, share, or otherwise 

distribute in any manner BWC recordings without the prior written authorization 
and approval of the Chief of Police/Sheriff or a designee.  

9.  Officers/deputies shall not permit civilians to review recordings without 

authorization of the Chief of Police/Sheriff or a designee.  

10. Officers/deputies shall download video files and charge the equipment at the end 
of each shift. Officers/deputies shall mark files as evidentiary, non-evidentiary, or 
training demo. Additionally, each file shall contain the date, BWC identifier (i.e. 
the series of numbers and/or letters assigned to each BWC to distinguish one 
piece of BWC equipment from another), and the name of the assigned 
officer/deputy. 

DCJS 

4 

 

11. Officers are restricted to reviewing and categorizing their own videos. 
12. At the conclusion of the shift officers/deputies shall conduct an operability 

inspection and report any issues to their supervisor. 
 

D.  Supervisor Responsibility  

1.  Supervisors shall:  

a.  Ensure officers/deputies use BWCs in accordance with Department policy and 

procedure; 

b.  Review evidentiary video and re-categorize for indefinite retention if a 

complaint is associated with a recorded event or the officer/deputy has reason 
to believe an incident may generate a complaint; and  

c.  Conduct random weekly reviews of selected recordings in order to assess 

officer/deputy performance as well as identify videos that may be appropriate 
for training.  

2.  Supervisors may limit or restrict an officer/deputy from viewing the video file, if 

an officer/deputy is suspected of wrongdoing or involved in an officer/deputy-
involved shooting or other serious use of force.  

 

E.  Privacy and Restricted Use  

1.  Whenever practical officers/deputies shall inform individuals that they are being 

recorded.  

2.  In locations where individuals have a reasonable expectation of privacy, such as a 

residence, individuals may decline to be recorded unless the recording is being 
made pursuant to an investigation, arrest, or search of the residence or individuals 
within the residence.  

3.  In general BWCs are not to be used in the following circumstances:  

a.  Communications with other law enforcement personnel without the 

permission of the office of the Chief of Police/Sheriff or a designee;   

b.  Communications involving law enforcement tactical and strategic policy, 

procedures, or plans; 

c.  Encounters with undercover officers/deputies and confidential informants; 
d.  While conducting strip searches; 
e.  When community members are reporting crime; 
f.  Appearing before a magistrate; 
g.  When officers/deputies are on break or otherwise engaged in personal 

activities; or 

h.  In restrooms or locker rooms.  

4.  Officers/deputies shall comply with individual federal, state, and local courthouse 

policies regarding the wearing of BWCs within respective courthouses. 

5.  Law enforcement officers shall comply with medical facility policies pertaining to 

video and audio recordings.  
 

F.  Access  

1.  The BWC equipment and all data, images, sounds, video, and metadata captured, 
recorded, or otherwise produced by the equipment shall be the exclusive property 
of the issuing Department.  

2.  All access to BWC data must be specifically authorized by the Chief of 

Police/Sheriff or a designee. 

3.  Officers/deputies may be permitted to review video footage of an incident in 

DCJS 

5 

 

which they were involved, prior to preparing a report or making a statement about 
the incident. 

4.  All access is to be audited to ensure that only authorized users are accessing the 

data for legitimate and authorized purposes.  

5.  Officers/deputies requesting video for trials must make such requests through the 

Chief of Police/Sheriff or a designee at least ten (10) business days prior to the 
trial date. Situations where circumstances outside of the officer’s/deputy’s control 
prevent such notification shall be handled on a case-by-case basis. 

6.  Court personnel (e.g. representatives from the Office of the Commonwealth’s 
Attorney, Virginia Indigent Defense Commission, and the private defense bar) 
may request videos for trial through the Chief of Police/Sheriff or a designee.   

7.  Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) and media requests of video shall be 
submitted to the Chief of Police/Sheriff or designee and shall comply with 
requirements of Title 2.2 of the Code of Virginia.  

a.  Video capturing criminal incident information pertaining to an ongoing 
law enforcement investigation or prosecution shall not be released if the 
release of the video is likely to jeopardize the investigation, prosecution, 
or safety of an individual; or likely to cause a suspect to flee or evade 
detection, or result in the destruction of evidence.  

b.  Criminal investigative files are excluded from FOIA requirements but may 

be disclosed by the Chief of Police/Sheriff in his discretion, except where 
disclosure is prohibited by law.  

c.  Provisions will be made for blurring the image of individuals or the 

personal identifying information (e.g. license plates, addresses etc.) of 
those not involved in the law enforcement act at question or an act 
described in section (C)(3) of this policy prior to releasing the video to the 
media or the individual making the FOIA request.  

 

G.  Video Retention  

1.  Officers/deputies shall make requests for the deletion of portions of the recording 

(e.g. in the event of a personal recording, conversations with confidential 
informants etc.) in writing. The Chief of Police/Sheriff or a designee shall 
approve or deny requests in accordance with records and retention schedules 
issued by the Library of Virginia. All requests for deletions and the final decision 
shall be kept on file.  

2.  All video files shall be securely stored in accordance with the records and 

retention schedules issued by the Library of Virginia. If a video is re-classified to 
a different category (e.g. non-evidentiary to evidentiary) the video will be subject 
to deletion based on the new category and the original date of the recording. 

3.  Back-up storage for video files shall be provided. 

 
 
 

 

 

DCJS 

6 

